ANNUAL REPORT      It's time to celebrate energy The world changes and the energy changes with it. Through the art of reinventing, innovating, revolutionizing and transforming the future. Through creativity which drives the engine of technology. We look at the past as a gallery of memories that inspires us for new creations in the future. Energy embodies an infinite narrative built every day as an inexhaustible and inspiring work of art.  Energy as the new Art    Index  Message from the Chairman  5  Interview with the CEO  8  1 The Company EDP Renováveis in Brief 2016 in Review Organization  17 26 29  2 Strategy Business Environment Business Plan Risk Management  41 52 59  3 Execution Economic Stakeholders Safety First Environment Innovation  67 78 89 90 92  4 Sustainability  95  5 Corporate Governance  13  6 2016 Consolidated Annual Accounts  209  Concepts and Definitions  305      António Mexia Chairman of the Board of Directors   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Message from the Chairman  Dear reader, It’s an honor to once again share with you achievements EDPR has made over the last year. In 2016, the company brought its total portfolio of clean, renewable energy to 10.4 GW of installed capacity by year-end, with the addition of 820 MW of new wind energy capacity. Of that capacity, 429 MW were added in the United States, our most important growth market; 200 MW in Mexico, which corresponds to our first project there; 120 MW in Brazil, which more than doubled our capacity in the country; and the remaining 72 MW in Europe. A total of 24.5 TWh of clean electricity was produced, avoiding the emission of about 20.1 million tons of CO2 and delivering on our commitment to conducting business in a way that contributes to a more sustainable planet. Over the course of 2016, EDPR reinforced its position as the growth driver within EDP Group as it contributes now to 32% of EDP Group’s recurrent EBITDA. We remain faithful to our focus on renewables, clearly a key solution to the global fight against climate change, among other side benefits. The political consensus around this topic has been to set a goal to limit global warming to 1.5º C. However, tangible initiatives are still missing to entirely tackle this enormous challenge. Currently only a small fraction of CO2 emissions worldwide are properly taxed. Even the EU Emissions Trading System is highly ineffective at encouraging changes to the energy mix given the oversupply of allowances that keep carbon prices too low. The economics of the sector have changed, we are moving from a variable-cost to a fixed-cost system, in which marginal pricing is no longer sufficient to incentivize investments, providing no clear long-term price signals incentives. The market must be redesigned and readapt in order to effectively promote the need for an increasing share of renewables in the energy mix. At current pool prices in wholesale markets, the sector does not offer the right economic incentives to invest, in renewables, nor in conventional sources. We believe that competition in the sector is important, but should be of a different nature, with ex-ante bidding in well-thought-out auctions for capacity, rather than ex-post marginal pricing in wholesale markets.  6  The turn towards renewables is inevitable. For instance, the EU aims to cut its total carbon emissions by at least 80% by 2050, from 1990 levels. It already has binding emissions’ and renewables’ targets for 2020 and EU leaders have also committed to 2030 targets. We therefore remain confident in our vision of enduring opportunities with realistic value as the result of doing business on the right side of the energy sector. Last May, we updated our business plan through 2020. The company’s business case was set to remain supported in a clear strategic agenda over our distinctive three pillars: i) selective growth - on one side, prioritizing quality investments in our core markets (at about 700 MW per year versus 500 MW per year in the previous 2014-17 business plan), most of which have already secured high visibility over their returns through long-term contracts; and, on the other side, reinforcing our portfolio mix in new technologies, namely solar and wind offshore; ii) operational excellence – maximizing electricity production by leveraging on our high technical expertise, and reach higher levels of availability of our assets and superior load factors in our current and new projects in particular, while further reducing our core opex per unit of capacity, consolidating our unique operation and maintenance capabilities; iii) self-funding business – covering our €4.8 billion investment plan in the 2016-20 period, mainly from the retained cash flow from our assets, and this time only partly supplemented by our assets’ rotation program with an amount of up to €1.1 billion. Half of our target for the company’s assets’ rotation program has already been reached. The appetite for equity stakes in renewable energy projects is increasing among institutional investors, such as infrastructure and sovereign wealth funds, and the program outlined in our business plan is well ahead of schedule. The €550 million transaction we carried out in the middle of last year, involving a 49% stake in a portfolio of projects in Europe, took place at an attractive multiple of €1.7 million per MW.   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  This figure marks a clear indicator of the quality of the company’s assets and the success of our strategy to crystallize value and enhance profitable growth, under a balanced discipline of indebtedness. In addition, and in the context of the strategic partnership between EDP and China Three Gorges, another €363 million final consideration was settled in a transaction involving the sale to CTG of 49% of a portfolio of wind energy assets in Poland and Italy, bringing the cumulative amount raised by EDPR to €0.8 billion, since the program’s establishment in late 2011. EBITDA reached €1,171 million in the 2016 financial year, while EBITDA adjusted for non-recurring items increased 12% year-on-year. On its turn, Net Income was €56 million, a 66% year-on-year decline due mostly to below average wind resources in the year and to favorable non-recurring events impacting the prior year and some unfavorable accounting impacts this year, yet having a positive outcome for the financial results in the immediate future. More importantly, Retained Cash Flow, the net cash flow generated by our assets and available either for reinvestment, debt reduction or distribution to the company’s shareholders, totalled €698 million in 2016, representing a 13% year-on-year increase.  tive, which set 10 principles in the areas of human rights, employment, environment and anti-corruption. The business plan defines explicit targets, setting a roadmap that brings together the three sustainability pillars and is laid down in ten different areas in line with the new UN Sustainable Development Goals through 2030. The action of the company is surely a keystone in the ongoing EDP Group’s high performance in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index for the Utilities Sector. I would like to express my gratitude for the full support of all the company’s corporate bodies, namely my fellow members of the Board of Directors, who provided the necessary challenge and drive for another successful year. Also, I would like to express our appreciation to all of those related to our company, in particular our shareholders and business partners comprising our landowners, suppliers, government entities and regulators. But most of all, I want to emphasize my gratitude for the hard work and dedication of our 1,083 employees worldwide who are the basis for our excellence in terms of operational performance and growth, therefore enhancing the success story that is EDPR.  Yours sincerely,  In light of this, it will be proposed at the General Shareholders Meeting to maintain the €0.05 per share dividend distribution, same as in the previous period, thus above the guided 25-35% range of consolidated net income, but representing only about 6% of total net cash generation. EDP Renováveis is clear proof of how caring for the environment can lead to new profitable business models based on clean and carbon-free energy generation. Not just that, the company acts responsibly before all its stakeholders, as stated in its sustainable development principles and the public commitments that were underwritten, notably the United Nations Global Compact initia-  7   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  João Manso Neto Vice-chairman of the Board of Directors and CEO  8   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  Interview with the CEO  Q1 HOW SATISFIED ARE YOU WITH EDPR’S 2016 FINANCIAL RESULTS? Objectively, I would point out that at EDPR we have once again delivered a solid execution of the strategic agenda laid out in our 2016-20 business plan. That was demonstrated by our ability to reach most of our 2020 targets. We have added 820 MW of installed capacity to our portfolio, exceeding our 700 MW yearly average target, with an additional 248 MW under construction. Our total electricity production of 24.5 TWh represents a 14% increase and surpasses our 10% yearly growth target. EBITDA of €1.171 million increased by 12% adjusted for non-recurring items, above our yearly growth target. This performance was made possible by a positive contribution of €40 million in our electricity price hedges, which have very effectively sheltered our revenues from some unfavorable price movements in wholesale markets. It was also supported by a 5% reduction in the Core Opex/MW, in excess of our 1% reduction target. Our results could have been even better if wind resources had been closer to normal levels, but our average load factor fell 4% short of the P50 scenario in 2016, standing 11% below in the fourth quarter. Obviously, weather conditions are out of our control, but we are confident that wind resources always revert to its mean performance in the long-run. In contrast, something in which we have a degree of control is the energy availability of our assets where we keep delivering an outstanding performance of 97.7%, above our target of 97.5%. Our high-quality assets yielded €698 million of Retained Cash Flow, the net cash generated by our assets after remunerating the external sources of financing - namely debt, tax equity and asset rotation partners. The Retained Cash Flow is the amount available for reinvestment, deleveraging or distribution to our shareholders. This figure was 13% higher than the previous year, a fact that demonstrates our company’s solid growth profile. In 2016, under the rigor of our self-funded business model, we successfully cashed in a sizeable asset rotation deal of €550 million at an attractive multiple of €1.7 million per MW to further leverage the cash flow generation of our assets by fueling additional growth opportunities. Along the way, we are consistently lowering our cost of debt, which is currently at 4.0%, after restructuring and  prepaying about €2.3 billion since 2015, of which €0.9 billion this last year. In this process of optimizing our cost of debt, sometimes we end up having to write-down some items associated with the cancelled debt, negatively impacting our current net profit, yet clearly standing to benefit our future Net Income. For instance, in 2016, we incurred more than €25 million in such non-recurring expenses, and €8 million in the year before. Due to this process and other non-recurring items, along with a below-average wind resource, our reported Net Income of €56 million declined 66% in 2016. Yet, our Net Income adjusted was €104 million and this is grossly in line with the previous year adjusted for non-recurring events, namely the significant non-cash positive impact of the revaluation of some assets we acquired control of in Portugal that were previously jointly owned. I would like to reinforce that the decline in Net Income year-on-year is justified by non-recurrent short-term factors, which make sense from a long-term strategic perspective, since they will reduce our cost of debt and thereby improve future results. Q2 DO YOU MAINTAIN YOUR POSITION ON THE COMPETITIVENESS OF WIND ONSHORE EVEN WITHOUT INCENTIVES? Absolutely. The evidence is growing ever more indisputable. Recently, independent studies by industry experts showed that wind onshore technology has seen its “levelized cost of energy” - the all-in cost of building and operating a plant over its lifetime - drop by 66% since 2009, with an additional 26% decline expected by 2025. Wind onshore and solar photovoltaic are currently competitive with gas and coal-fired plants in many areas. Administratively set tariffs and other incentive-supporting mechanisms have played a role in fostering the deployment of renewables, allowing these technologies to progress and thus help bring costs down, in a virtuous cycle. However, the success of renewables in reaching higher penetration in the energy mix has created a vicious cycle of depressed power prices in wholesale markets, as those energy sources have almost zero marginal running costs after all, the wind and sun are free. Paradoxically, this creates a situation in which wholesale market prices continue to fall as more renewables are connected to the  9   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  grid. Without a new market model framework, investors will lack the incentives to take on the necessary investments. Wholesale prices in Europe dropped from about €80 per MWh in 2008 to €30-50 currently. Yet the solution, in our view, must not come from adding more subsidies to the system, but rather from fixing the currently dysfunctional power markets in a world that demands more renewables. Clearly, a system based on marginal costs is not adequate. We need long-term price certainty to incentivize up-front capital investment in the installation of renewable capacity. That is why we favor market competition for new capacity installations with reliable prices over the long run, avoiding exposure to variable wholesale prices. Market fixing should also come in the form of more effective pricing of CO2 emissions. Also essential are investments in power grids to better manage the intermittency of renewables, with more interconnectivity reaching longer distances and smarter adaptations to supply and demand. Q3 IF WIND ONSHORE IS TRULY COMPETITIVE, WHERE YOU’RE ALREADY A KEY GLOBAL PLAYER, THEN WHY THE DIVERSIFICATION INTO SOLAR AND WIND OFFSHORE? Simply put, there are places where wind onshore is not viable or is less competitive than other energy sources, such as solar. This is true for France, due to a lack of both available territory and social acceptance of wind farms in the landscape. These factors account for the interest in wind offshore in the country. In the UK and other North Sea regions, wind offshore is also a strong industry that has attracted many interests given the rich wind offshore resources. The solar case is already valid in some regions of the US, such as California, or countries in southern Europe, where solar photovoltaic is more economical. We believe that solar technology and costs will continue to improve, and that solar and wind are set to become the two most competitive technologies. Therefore, we must be able to offer the best renewable technology for each market at each moment. This need explains our increased focus on solar, which will represent 10% of our capacity additions through 2020 according to our business plan, and our investment stake in developing wind offshore.  10  Moreover, many of our competitive advantages in wind onshore are replicable in wind offshore and solar photovoltaic technologies. That’s another reason why it makes perfect sense. Q4 HAVE THE RECENT POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS IN THE US, CURRENTLY YOUR MOST IMPORTANT GROWTH MARKET, PROMPTED YOU TO CHANGE YOUR STRATEGY? Some concern about the US’s new political landscape for renewables made a noticeable impact on our stock price performance since the last quarter of the year. We always act as takers of the political choices made by voters and citizens, and we never speak out publicly about governing bodies of countries where we operate. Nonetheless, we feel certain that the business case remains strong and see no reason to change course in our strategy to consider the US our core growth market. In recent Senate hearings, the new Secretary of the Treasury voiced his support of the current Production Tax Credit scheme. This reaffirms the phase-out of PTCs, approved in 2015, that enjoyed bipartisan support in a Republican-majority Congress. In the US, we have secured PTCs under safe harbor for our current 2016-20 business plan target additions of 1.8 GW. This includes PPAs of 1.1 GW, more than 55% of which were signed with non-utilities. Also, 0.4 GW of this capacity was already commissioned in 2016. We are currently taking continuous commercial actions to close PPAs for the remaining 0.7 GW; for which we have over 5 GW of possibilities in the pipeline. If we find conditions to promote even more of our pipeline than our initial target, we have also secured PTCs under safe harbor for an additional 1.3 GW as an option we can execute namely through a “build and transfer” approach without affecting our balance sheet. The fundamentals in favor of renewables remain in place. In most of the country, wind and solar are already the sources of energy with the lowest levelized costs - even unsubsidized - and those costs are expected to decline further in the years to come. Even though the Clean Power Plan is now likely to be delayed, plenty of additional demand for renewable energy will still exist; note that it provided less than 5% of the nation’s electricity in 2015.   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  These increases in demand are the result of three clear drivers: increasing renewables quotas under the Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) defined at the state level; utilities retiring coal power plants, which are either old or non-compliant with environmental regulations; and increased interest from the C&I (commercial and industrial) segment in negotiating long-term contracts directly with renewables suppliers, which in 2015 accounted for more than 50% of the PPA market. Moreover, deploying renewable infrastructure generates local jobs and benefits local communities and economies, generally in rural areas. If the likely tax reform includes a reduction in the current 35% federal income tax rate, the tax burden over the return on assets will surely be reduced. However, it is still too early to assess the full potential impact of this change and any eventual effects on the financing conditions from the indispensable tax equity. Q5 WHAT ABOUT THE SITUATION IN EUROPE? DO YOU SEE POSITIVE PROSPECTS THERE AS WELL? The case of Europe is a bit less prominent in the short term than that of the US, as the latter still has much lower penetration of renewables. In the long term, however, prospects are equally positive and share the same fundamentals. We believe that opportunities in Europe are set to escalate in the medium term based on several factors: the 2030 targets already unveiled, a 40% cut on CO2 emissions and over than 27% share of renewable energy consumption; the recovery of electricity demand together with a common vision in Europe for a competitive and sustainable energy matrix and a redesign of the market, and the wave of nuclear and coal power plant shut-downs already announced in several European countries. In the short term, opportunities are limited as electricity demand is stagnant or declining due to growing energy efficiency; a sluggish economy; and some degree of overcapacity of electricity systems that still persists. That’s why we are currently exploring areas in Europe where our low-risk approach fits in. Projects with visible execution in our planned 2016-20 additions include 0.5 GW of capacity in Portugal, Italy and France, where suitable business opportunities are available with high visibility over prices in the long run. There is also Brazil, a growing wind energy market that  benefits from strong wind resource. We built 120 MW there in 2016, and have 127 MW under construction for 2017 and 143 MW in an auction secured for 2018. Despite some socio-economic turmoil in the country, we remain confident that Brazil will continue to provide profitable business opportunities for us. Q6 HOW DO YOU SEE EDPR IN TERMS OF EFFICIENCY AND COST CONTROL? I believe that we have a distinctive approach as compared to our peers, namely in terms of our unique O&M strategy. We internalize our core activities through our modular maintenance and self-perform models for the wind farms in which the full-scope contract has already expired. By performing high value-added activities in house, we are able to reduce costs by extracting value from manufacturers while minimizing our dependency on them. Due to our experience and expertise in running wind farms, we are able to do this without jeopardizing the quality of our O&M activities or our technical availability. We carefully assess which maintenance model best fits each of our wind farms and, in the case of modular maintenance, we also decide on the level of insourcing activities. The results obtained confirm the success of this strategy as the 5% year-on-year decrease in the Cope Opex / Average MW is also supported by our O&M models. As our business plan describes, we expect to further decrease the proportion of full scope in our portfolio in the future. Q7 WHAT MAKES YOU BELIEVE YOU HAVE THE RIGHT COMPANY TO DELIVER ON YOUR PLAN? I can point to three essential qualities: our strong market positioning, solid balance sheet and excellent technical and human capital. Our teams have a visible track record of delivering results that reflect distinctive core competencies in areas that are key success factors for our industry. The systematic premium of our capacity load factors versus the averages computable in most of the markets where we operate is an indisputable indication of this. In 2016, our load factors surpassed the market average by 2 pp in Spain and France, 1 pp in Poland and 6 pp in Italy. Another clear sign of our teams’ outstanding collective performance is visible in our ability to win auctions profitably and close long-term contracts successfully. Just look to  11   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  our share in last year’s auction awarded in Canada and Italy, or our consistent ability to close long-term PPAs in the US, both with utilities and non-utilities. Naturally, this is also the outcome of our well-established presence in key markets with continuing business opportunities. We do not need to prioritize expansion into new countries, as there is enough scope in our current markets to deepen our presence while remaining diversified and maintaining our growth objectives. It is also important to be present in markets and technologies in which price is not all that matters, as in wind offshore in high-income economies such as the UK or France, or as in solar that complements the energy mix in many relevant markets, such as California or Southern Europe. Finally, we have the financial muscle to take on an investment plan close to €5 billion for the 2016-20 period even amid an external environment that is not always favorable to risk minimization that could allow the lowest cost of funding appropriate for such large long-term infrastructure investments. We rely mainly on our own net cash flow generation, supplemented by a logic asset rotation program. Our shareholders are confident in us, and are willing to accept a relatively modest dividend distribution that is justified by the accretive growth opportunities that we offer. Our sustainable business principles are well integrated into our day-to-day operations and in our strategic plan. Sustainability is at the core of EDPR, and a clear roadmap up to 2020 has been set based on explicit targets in 10 areas: health and safety, environmental protection, ethics, innovation, human capital development, social support, stakeholders management, waste management, CO2 avoidance and risk management.  12  Q8 IS THERE A FINAL MESSAGE YOU WOULD LIKE TO SHARE? I'd like to take this opportunity to reiterate our confidence in achieving our business plan targets, namely a compounded annual EBITDA growth rate of 8% along with Retained Cash Flow of more than €900 million by 2020. Capacity additions are well on track. More than 65% of the 3.5 GW planned for 2016-20 has already been built or secured with high visibility over the top line, with prices awarded through auctions or long-term contracts. The outlook for 2017, is to reach low double-digit growth rates in EBITDA and Retained Cash Flow. That is based on the near term visibility of the operating drivers of the business, namely the earlier addition of new energy capacity and the superior performance of our Opex efficiency. I would like to thank all of our stakeholders - shareholders, employees, local communities, landowners, suppliers, public authorities, offtakers, among others - who help us achieve our business plan objectives on a daily basis and make it possible to construct and operate wind farms and solar plants at very high standard levels - powerful tools for tackling climate change. I'd like to especially thank our shareholders for their belief in us and our vision for the future, as well as our employees for their ability to stay focused and to transform challenges into opportunities.   1 The Company  EDP Renováveis in Brief Vision, Mission, Values and Commitments World Presence Business Description Stakeholder Focus Sustainability Roadmap  17 18 20 21 24  2016 in Review Key Metrics Summary Share Performance  26 28  Organization Shareholders Governance Model Organization Structure  29 30 34     ENERGY AS THE NEWART  16  16   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  1 The Company  1.1. EDP Renováveis in Brief 1.1.1. VISION, MISSION, VALUES AND COMMITMENTS  Vision A global energy, renewable company, leader in value, creation, innovation and sustainability.  Mission Aim to be a long-term market leader in the renewable energy sector, pursuing credibility through safety, value creation, social responsibility, innovation, and respect for the environment.  Values  Commitments We join conduct and professional rigour to enthusiasm and initiative, emphasizing team work • We listen to our stakeholders and answer in a simple and clear manner • We surprise our stakeholders by anticipating their needs •  INITIATIVE through behaviour and attitude of our people  We ensure the participatory, competent and honest governance of our business • We believe that the balance between private and professional live is fundamental in order to be successful •  TRUST of shareholders, employees, customers, suppliers and other stakeholders  We fulfil the commitments that we embraced in the presence of our shareholders • We place ourselves in our stakeholder’s shoes whenever a decision has to be made • We promote the development of skills and merit •  EXCELLENCE in the way we perform  We are leaders due to our capacity of anticipating and implementing • We avoid specific greenhouse gas emissions with the energy we produce • We demand excellence in everything that we do •  INNOVATION to create value in our areas of operation  SUSTAINABILITY aimed at the quality of life for current and future generations  •  We assume the social and environmental responsibilities that result from our performance thus contributing toward the development of the regions in which we are operating  17  17   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  1.1.2. WORLD PRESENCE  Canada  United Kingdom  Belgium France  United States  Spain Portugal  Mexico  Brazil  During 2016 EDP Renováveis generated 24.5 TWh avoiding the emissions of 20.1 mt of CO2 EDPR is a market leader with top quality assets in 12 countries, managing a global portfolio of 10.4 GW of installed capacity, 248 MW under construction and much more in pipeline development, employing 1,083 employees.  18  Poland Romania Italy   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  EUROPE  Spain 373 employees 2,371 MW Operational 4,926 GWh generated France 53 employees 388 MW Operational 777 GWh generated +18 MW under construction +430 MW offshore in pipeline Poland 38 employees 418 MW Operational 951 GWh generated Italy 23 employees 144 MW Operational 258 GWh generated +127 MW in pipeline with PPA  Portugal 72 employees 1,251 MW Operational 3,047 GWh generated +3 MW under construction Belgium 2 employees 71 MW Operational 128 GWh generated Romania 32 employees 521 MW Operational 1,143 GWh generated United Kingdom 34 employees 1.1 GW (max) of offshore in pipeline  NORTH AMERICA  United States  Canada  410 employees  5 employees  4,811 MW Operational  30 MW Operational  12,501 GWh generated  75 GWh generated  +100 MW under construction  +100 MW in pipeline  +551 MW in pipeline with PPA  with PPA  Mexico 7 employees 200 MW Operational  Brazil 34 employees 204 MW Operational 666 GWh generated +127 MW under construction +140 MW in pipeline with PPA  19   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  1.1.3. BUSINESS DESCRIPTION Our renewable energy business grossly comprises the development, construction and operation of fully controlled wind farms and solar plants to generate and deliver clean electricity.  DEVELOPMENT  Site Identification Search for sites with top-class wind conditions or irradiance resource and analyse grid connection feasibility.  CONSTRUCTION  Layout Design and Equipment Choice Optimize the layout of the farm and select the best fit of equipment model based on the site characteristics.  DEVELOPMENT  Project Evaluation and Funding Evaluate potential operational and financial risks and find appropriate finance to the project.  CONSTRUCTION  Construction Build access roads, prepare foundations, assemble wind turbines or solar panels, construct substation.  Renewable Resource Analysis Install meteorogical equipment to collect and study wind profile and solar radiance.  Landowner Agreement Contact local landowners and negotiate leasing agreement.  Obtain Consents and Permits Engage with local public authorities to secure environmental, construction, operating and other licenses.  OPERATION  Opening Ceremony Celebrate the benefits of renewable energy with local communities, authorities and other stakeholders.  Wind and Solar Plant Operation Complete grid connection and start to generate renewable electricity.  OPERATION  Generate and Deliver Clean Energy A better energy, a better future, a better world!  20 20  Ongoing Maintenance Service Keep availability figures at the highest level possible and minimise failure rates.  Data Analysis Monitor real-time operational data, analyse performance and identify opportunities for improvement.   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  1.1.4. STAKEHOLDER FOCUS (G4-24, G4-25, G4-26)1 EDP Renováveis, in line with the policies created by the EDP Group, is an innovative company concerning the way it manages the relations with its stakeholders. One of the company’s main objectives is to serve and engage with not only its investors and shareholders, but with the remaining stakeholders as well: employees, suppliers, communities and the media, among others. All of these translates into important relationships that impact the company’s performance. Because of this vision, we aim to maintain and enhance an open and transparent dialogue with our stakeholders to build and strengthen trust, promote information and knowledge sharing, predict future challenges and identify opportunities for cooperation. We have four main guiding commitments: Comprehend, Communicate, Collaborate and Trust. These are part of a comprehensive plan that involves all business areas and uses cross-functional tools.  Comprehend  Communicate  Include, Identify, and Prioritize: We have dynamically and systematically identified the Stakeholders that influence by the Company, and we analyse and try to understand their expectations and interests in the decisions that directly impact on them.  Inform, Listen, and Respond: We are commited to promoting two-way dialogue with Stakeholders through information and consulting initiatives. We listen, inform and respond to Stakeholders in a consistent, clear, rigorous and transparent manner, with the aim of building strong, durable close relationships.  Collaborate  Trust  Integrate, Share, Cooperate, Report: We aim to collaborate with Stakeholders to build strategic partnerships that bring together and share knowledge, skills and tools, thereby promoting the creation of shared value in a differentiating manner.  Transparency, Integrity, Respect, Ethics: We believe that the promotion of a climate of trust with our Stakeholders is crucial to establishing stable, long-term relationships. Our relationship with stakeholders is based on values like transparency, integrity and mutual respect.  We want to communicate cohesively with the various groups of stakeholders, regardless of the department they fall under. The image below lists the different stakeholders groups, using Spain as an example: MAR KE T  VAL UE CH AI N  Competitors  Investors, Analysts and Banks  Employees  Customers (offtakers)  Land Owners  Media  Suppliers  STAKEHOLDERS Distribution and transmissionsystem operators  Associations  ND LA CIA SO  1  O R IA L  Y AC CR MO DE  Local Communities  Public Authorities & International Institutions  NGOs  EN VI RO NM ENT  Universities  IT RR TE  Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) Disclosure Labels. To learn more about the GRI Directives, please visit www.globalreporting.org  21   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  After surveying stakeholders’ perceptions and expectations, a whole new Stakeholder Management Plan was put in place aiming to satisfy those expectations by generating value, improving performance and minimizing possible risks to the business.  May 2016  Sep 2016  Feb 2017  2017  2015 Performance Survey Report  Kick-off Stakeholder Management Plan  2016 Performance Survey and internal data collection  On going Management Plan  This year we started a series of initiatives aiming to improve performance beyond mere adequacy and to truly engage our different stakeholder groups in a convergent manner and with common practices and messages. For this purpose, it was necessary to change from a vision and management centered on departments or business units to a corporate, cross-functional, convergent model that offers coherence and synergy, secure alignment and promote the efficient use of resources. Furthermore, a Stakeholder Steering Committee was created to establish the Stakeholders Management Plan, monitor progress and evaluate results. In addition, a Stakeholder Working Group, made up of members from different departments and units is in charge of enacting the committee’s plans, made the ideas operational and impactful. In addition to soft indicators such as satisfaction, relations, credibility, important issues for each stakeholder, delivery and transparency, the Stakeholders Management Plan also includes new indicators, such as the degree of influence on  Following the first major stakeholder survey conducted in Spain, working groups were set up to put in action plan into practice across the company.  business-related decision-making processes, as well as the relevance of issues for EDPR’s business. Therefore, the Stakeholders Management Plans for 2016 and beyond aim not only to improve perception, but also make an impact on the business. Technological tools, such as CRM (Customer Relations Management), will be used in stakeholders’ management in order to re-shape the way information is handled.  HOW CAN WE IMPACT EDPR’S BUSINESS ON A GLOBAL SCALE? Following this pilot project for stakeholders management in the Spanish market, in the future we will conduct similar practices across all EDPR markets around the world. The goal is developing a global vision of the company’s relationships with stakeholders across its different locations in a transversal way.  Main communication channels Media and all communication channels play a key role in managing the relations with the stakeholders. EDPR uses diverse channels to communicate with our stakeholders. In addition, to ensure continuous dialogue and a close relationship with them, EDPR aims to use the most effective channels to identify and manage expectations, minimizing and ensuring better control of the risks associated with each stakeholder group.  22 22   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  Stakeholders Group  Means of engagement  Employees  • Internal communications and surveys • Intranet, Magazine, Newsletter, HR App and Corporate TV • Annual Meeting, Training and Evaluation  Customers (mostly offtakers)  • Meetings, Reports and Updates  Transmission / distribution system operators (DSO/TSO)  • Intitutional Interactions (from the initial request to connect into their grid until the start of power production)  Suppliers  • Meetings, Emails, • Evaluation and Inquiries  Investors, Analysts and Banks  • Website, Quarterly and annual reports and presentations • Meetings, Investor Day and Roadshows • Inquiries  National and local public authorities  • Local Interactions, Events and Meetings (with Regulators, Tax authorities, City halls)  Landowners  • Regular meetings, Wind farms inauguration  Local community  • Local presence, Meetings, Sponsorships • Events and Corporate social responsibility programmes • Visits to the wind-farms  Associations  • Website, Meetings • Sponsorship and Conferences  Media  • Meetings and Events • Website, Conferences  NGO’s  • Meetings and Events • Website, Conferences  Universities  • Corporate social responsibility programmes • Meetings and Events  Competitors  • Website, Events, Conferences • Emails  Through the Stakeholders Global Survey, EDPR works to identify areas of improvement with each particular group by analyzing which communication channels are mostly used with each stakeholder and which ones are the most effective. In addition, data is collected to understand how much each media channel influence decisions, recommendations and business-related behaviors in a way that helps us managing them in order to generate value for the company in the future. Since communication channels will remain at the center of stakeholder management, all stakeholder’s leaders and managers are working together to produce coherent messages, align the strategy and constant monitoring.  23  23   ENERGY ENERGY THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  1.1.5. SUSTAINABILITY ROADMAP EDPR, as a renewable energy company, creates great expectations in its stakeholders about Sustainability. Responding to these expectations the company keeps committed to excel in all three pillars of sustainability - namely the economic, the environmental and the social - defining a strategy of best practices. Following a culture of continuous improvement, 10 Sustainability goals were defined within the 2016-2020 Business Plan. United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)  Sustainability Roadmap Strategic Lines (2016-20)  Maintain leadership position in RENEWABLE ENERGY PRODUCTION Affordable and Clean Energy  Climate Action  CREATE VALUE while maintaining a LOW RISK profile Decent Work and Economic Growth  Optimize ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT Clean Water and Sanitation  Life Below Water  Life on Land  Maintain CIRCULAR ECONOMY in the internal management of the operations Responsible Consumption and Production  Ensure high SAFETY STANDARDS for employees and contractors Good Health and Well-being  Ensure a high standard ETHICAL PROCESS Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions  Gender Equality  Broaden and harmonize the mechanisms of periodic consultation of STAKEHOLDERS Sustainable Cities and Communities  Promote INNOVATION in operation and construction phases Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure  Invest in employees DEVELOPMENT and ensure continued compromise with society through VOLUNTEERING  No Poverty  24 24  Zero Hunger  Quality Education  Reduced Inequalities  Support SOCIAL AND EDUCATIONAL INITIATIVES through Fundación EDP   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR  This roadmap brings together the three sustainability pillars and is laid down in 10 different areas: Operational growth, Risk controlling, Economic value creation, Environment, Value circle, People, Governance, Stakeholder Engagement, Innovation and Society. Defined goals make performance measurable to help drive the company as a growing leader in value creation, innovation and sustainability. Sustainability Roadmap Indicators (2016-20)  Execution 2016  • Installed capacity:700 MW /year • Avoided CO2:+10% (CAGR vs. 2015-20) • < 1% emitted / avoided CO2  • Increased 770 MW in 2016 Added +770 MW in 2016 • Avoided CO2:+7% in 2016 avoided CO • 0.1% emitted / avoided CO22 0.2%  • EBITDA:+8% (CAGR vs. 2015-20) • Net Profit:+16% (CAGR vs. 2015-20) • Core OPEX/MW:-1% (CAGR vs. 2015-20)  • Adj. EBITDA: +12%1 in 2016 • Adj. Net Profit: -4%1 in 2016 • -5% Core OPEX/MW in 2016  • 100% Certified MWs (ISO 14001) • 100% of critical suppliers with environmental management system (EMS)  • 89% Certified MWs (ISO 14001) based on 2016 Installed Capacity • 88% critical suppliers with EMS  • Maintain hazardous wastes and used water per GWh ratios aligned with previous years • > 90% Hazardous wastes recovered  • 26 Kg./GWh and 0.76 l/MWh • 87% Hazardous wastes recovered  • 100% Certified MWs (OHSAS 18001) • 100% of critical suppliers with H&S management system • Zero accidents mind-set  • 95% Certified MWs (OHSAS 18001) based 95% Certified MWs (OHSAS 18001) based on 2016 Installed Capacity on 2016 Installed Capacity • 83% critical suppliers with H&S management system  • Zero tolerance for unethical behaviors  • One communication to the Ethics Ombudsman2  • Stakeholders Plan development in all geographies  • Stakeholders execution plan in Spain  • c. €10m investments (incl. energy storage and offshore structures)  • c. €2m investment  • >80% of employees in training activities • >40% of employees in volunteering activities  • 100% of employees received training • 20% of employees participated in volunteering activities  • c. €2.5m investment  • €602k investment in 2016  1 Excluding non-recurrent items. Excluding non-recurrent items. 2 In 2016 there was one communication to the Ethics Ombudsmen through the Ethics Channel. However, itit was not considered as an ssue related to the Ethics Code and itit will In 2016 there was one communication to the Ethics Ombudsmen through the Ethics Channel. However, was not considered as an i i ssue related to the Ethics Code and will be suggested to be rejected during the next Committee Ethics. The issue has been submitted to the responsible area in order to be analyzed and take the corresponding measures.  1 2  25 25   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  1.2. 2016 in Review 1.2.1. KEY METRICS SUMMARY  INSTALLED CAPACITY  10.4GW  CAPEX  EBITDA + Net Equity  €1,029m +14% vs 2015  TECHNICAL AVAILABILITY  97.7%  NEW ADDITIONS  +0.8GW  +0.1p.p. vs 2015  EBITDA + Net Equity NET DEBT  €2.8 billion -26% vs 2015 NET INCOME  €56m -66% vs 2015  EBITDA  LOAD FACTOR  30% +1% vs 2015  26  €1,171m +3% vs 2015   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  1,083 EMPLOYEES +6% vs 2015  GENERATION  24.5 TWh CORE OPEX/MWh  EMISSIONS AVOIDED  20.1 mt CO2 +7% vs 2015  +14% vs 2015  €16.3/MWh -8% vs 2015  95% CAPACITY CERTIFIED OHSAS 18001  TRAINNING  OPERATING CASH-FLOW  €869m  100% employees trained 41hrs/employee  +24% vs 2015  27   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  1.2.2. SHARE PERFORMANCE In 2016, EDPR share price closed at €6.04 with an average daily volume of 1.13 million shares. EDPR has 872.3 million of shares listed and admitted to trading in NYSE Euronext Lisbon. On December 30th 2016 EDPR had a market capitalization of 5.3 billion euro, below than 6.3 billion euro at previous year-end, and equivalent to €6.04 per share. In 2016 total shareholder  return  was  -16%,  considering  the  Indexed EDPR share performance vs. PSI20 & SX6E 110  8%  100  12%  90  17%  80 70 Dec-15  dividend paid on May 16 of € 0.05 per share. th  Feb-16  Apr-16  Jun-16  EDPR  EDPR in Capital Markets  Aug-16  Oct-16  PSI20  Dec-16  SX6E  2016  2015  2014  2013  2012  Opening price (€)  7.25  5.404  3.86  3.99  4.73  Minimum price (€)  5.70  5.3  3.87  3.58  2.31  Maximum price (€)  7.28  7.25  5.7  4.36  4.86  Closing price (€)  6.04  7.25  5.4  3.86  3.99  5,265  6,324  4,714  3,368  3,484  Total traded volume: Listed & OTC (million)  291.07  289.22  396.84  448.15  446.02  …of which in NYSE Euronext Lisbon (million)  103.50  109.67  149.48  200.29  207.49  1.13  1.13  1.56  1.76  1.74  1,828.34  1,824.08  1,976.41  1,759.20  1,525.56  Market capitalization (€ million)  Average daily volume (million) Turnover (€ million) Average daily turnover (€ million)  7.11  7.13  7.75  6.9  5.96  Rotation of capital (% of total shares)  32%  33%  46%  51%  51%  141%  148%  205%  229%  228%  Rotation of capital (% of floating shares) Share price performance  -17%  34%  40%  -3%  -16%  Total shareholder return  -16%  35%  41%  -2%  -16%  PSI 20  -12%  +11%  -27%  +16%  +3%  -8%  -5%  +12%  +9%  -9%  Dow Jones Eurostoxx Utilities 8.0  1.8 m 1  10  2  11 13  7.0  1.6 m  14  8  1.4 m  15  6 4  1.2 m  12  6.5  16  1.0 m  7 17  5  6.0  9  3  20 18  5.5 5.0 Dec-15  22  0.8 m 0.6 m  21 19  0.4 m  Volume (Millions)  Share Pirce (€)  7.5  0.2 m 0.0 m  Feb-16  Mar-16  Apr-16  May-16  Jun-16  VOLUME  Jul-16  Aug-16  Last Price  Sep-16  Oct-16  Events  Nov-16  Dec-16  Source: Bloomberg / EDPR  1  EDPR informs about the Spanish renewable energy auction, 14-Jan  12  EDPR 1H16 Results release, 26-Jul  2  EDPR FY15 Volumes & Capacity Statement release, 26-Jan  13  EDPR secures PPA for new 200 MW wind farm in the US, 28-Jul  3  EDPR FY15 Annual Results release, 24-Feb  4  EDPR secures a new long term contract for 100 MW in Canada, 10-Mar  14  EDPR established new institutional partnership structure for 328 MW in the US, 26-Sep  15  EDPR 9M16 Volumes & Capacity Statement release, 18-Oct  16  EDPR concludes the sale of minority stakes in Poland and Italy, 27-Oct  17  EDPR 9M Results Release, 03-Nov  18  EDPR secures a 75 MW PPA for a new wind farm in the United States, 28-Nov  19  EDPR established new institutional partnership structure for 101 MW in the US, 14-Dec  10 EDPR Payment of Dividends (€0.05 per share), 16-May  20  Changes on EDPR´s corporate bodies, 16-Dec  11 EDPR 1H16 Volumes & Capacity Statement release, 12-Jul  21  EDPR completed $343m funding of tax equity in the US, 20-Dec  22  EDPR was awarded long term contracts for 127 MW at the Italian wind auction, 23-Dec  5  EDPR Annual Shareholders' Meeting, 14-Apr  6  EDPR executes an asset rotation transaction in Europe, 19-Apr  7  EDPR 1Q16 Volumes & Capacity Statement release, 20-Apr  8  EDPR 1Q16 Results release, 04-May  9  EDP Group Capital Markets Day, 05-May  28 28   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  1.3. Organization 1.3.1. SHAREHOLDERS EDPR Shareholders  EDPR shareholders are spread across 23 countries. EDP (“Energias de Portugal”) is the major one holding 77.5% of the share capital since launching the company’s IPO in June 2008.  19% 3%  EDPR total share capital is, since its initial public offering (IPO) in June 2008, composed of 872,308,162 shares issued with a nominal value of five euros each, fully paid. All these shares are part of a single class and series and are admitted to trading on the NYSE Euronext Lisbon regulated market. 78%  EDP  MSF  Major shareholder, the EDP Group  Other Shareholders  The majority of the company’s share capital is owned by EDP Group, holding 77.5% of the share capital and voting rights, since launching the company’s IPO in June 2008. EDP Group is a vertically integrated utility company, the largest generator, distributor and supplier of electricity in Portugal, has significant operations in electricity and gas in Spain and is one of the largest private  Shareholders (Ex-EDP) by type  generation group in Brazil through its stake in Energias do Brasil. In the Iberian  8%  largest distributors of gas. EDP has a relevant presence in the world energy  1%  8%  Peninsula, EDP is the third largest electricity generation company and one of the outlook, being present in 14 countries and close to 12,000 employees around the world. In 2016, EDP had an installed capacity of 25.2 GW, generating 70 TWh, of  25%  which 33% come from wind. EDP is part of sustainability indexes (DJSI World and Europe), following its performance in the economic, social and environmental dimensions. Its holding company, EDP SA, is a listed company whose ordinary shares are traded in the NYSE Euronext Lisbon since its privatization in 1997.  58%  Other qualified shareholders Besides the qualified shareholding of EDP Group, MFS Investment Management -  Investment funds SRI Other Pension Retail  an American-based global investment manager formerly known as Massachusetts Financial Services - communicated to CNMV in September 2013 an indirect qualified position, as collective investment institution, of 3.1% in EDPR share capital and voting rights.  Shareholders (Ex-EDP) by country 1% 17%  Broad base of investors EDPR has a broad base of international investors. Excluding EDP Group, EDPR shareholders comprise more than 65,000 institutional and private investors spread worldwide. Institutional investors represent about 92% of EDPR investor base (ex-EDP Group), while the remaining 8% stand private investors, most of  5%  whom are resident in Portugal. Within institutional investors, investment funds  6% 26%  7%  are the major type of investor, followed by sustainable and responsible funds (SRI). EDPR is a member of several financial indexes that aggregate top performing companies for sustainability and corporate social responsibility.  8% 12%  Worldwide shareholders  18%  EDPR shareholders are spread across 23 countries, being United States the most representative country, accounting for 26% of EDPR shareholder base (ex-EDP  US  PT  AU  NO  UK  NL  FR  RoE  RoW  Group), followed by United Kingdom, Portugal, Netherlands, Australia, France and Norway. In Rest of Europe the most representative countries are Switzerland, Spain and Sweden.  29  29   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  1.3.2. GOVERNANCE MODEL EDPR’s corporate governance model is designed to ensure transparency and accountability through a clear separation of duties between management and supervision of the company’s activities. Corporate governance is about promoting corporate fairness, transparency and accountability. EDPR’s corporate governance structure specifies the shareholders, board of directors, managers and other stakeholders’ rights and responsibilities and spells out the rules and procedures for making decisions on corporate affairs. It also incorporates the organization's strategic response to risk management. The corporate governance structure adopted is the one in effect in Spain. It comprises a General Meeting of Shareholders and a Board of Directors that represents and manages the company. As required by the law and established in the company’s articles of association, the Board of Directors has set up four specialized committees. These are the Executive Committee, the Audit and Control Committee, the Nominations and Remunerations Committee and the Committee on Related-Party Transactions. This governance structure and composition was chosen to adapt the company’s corporate governance model also to the Portuguese legislation and it seeks, insofar it is compatible with the Spanish law, to correspond to the so-called “AngloSaxon” model set forth in the Portuguese Commercial Companies Code, in which the management body is a Board of Directors, and the supervision and control duties are of the responsibility of a separate body, a Supervisory Board.  General Meeting of Shareholders  Board of Directors “BoD”  General Secretary  Executive Committee  Nominations and Remunerations Committee  Related-Party Transactions Committee  Audit and Control Committee  General Shareholders’ Meeting General Shareholders’ Meeting is the body where the shareholders participate, it has the power to deliberate and adopt decisions, by majority, on matters reserved by the law or the articles of association.  30   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  Board of Directors  António Mexia Chairman  Emilio García-Conde General Secretary  João Manso Neto Vice-Chairman and CEO  Miguel Dias Amaro  João Paulo Costeira  Gabriel Alonso  CFO  COO Europe & Brazil  COO North America  Nuno Alves  Jorge Santos  João de Mello Franco  Chairman  Chairman  Manuel Menéndez  Allan J.Katz  António Nogueira Leite  Gilles August  Francisco da Costa  Acácio Piloto  João Lopes Raimundo  José Ferreira Machado Chairman  Francisca Guedes de Oliveira  Executive Committee  Nominations and Remunerations Committee  Audit and Control Committee  Related-Party Transactions Committee  Independent Member  31   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Board of Directors EDPR’s BoD shall consist of no less than 5 and no more than 17 Directors, including a Chairperson. Currently it is composed by 17 board members, out of which 10 are independent. BoD members are elected for 3 years period and may be re-elected for equal periods. EDPR’s BoD has the broadest power for the administration, management and governance of the company, with no limitations other than the responsibilities expressly and exclusively invested in the General Shareholders Meeting, in the company’s articles of association or in the applicable law. Its members must meet at least 4 times a year, preferably once a quarter. Nonetheless, the Chairperson, on his own initiative or that of 3 Directors, shall convene a meeting whenever he deems fit for the company’s interests.  Executive Committee EDPR’s Executive Committee (EC) is composed by four members, including a Chief Executive Officer (CEO). The CEO coordinates the implementation of the BOD decisions and the Corporate and General Management functions, partially assigning those to the other executive officers, namely: the Chief Financial Officer (CFO), the Chief Operating Officer for Europe and Brazil (COO EU & BR) and the Chief Operating Officer for North America (COO NA). The CFO proposes and ensures the implementation of the financial policy and management, including financial negotiation, management and control, cash management optimization and financial risk management policy proposal; he also coordinates and prepares the business plan and the budget, manages the financial statements reporting analyses the operational and financial performance and coordinates procurement function and relations with key suppliers while ensuring the implementation of the procurement strategy and policy. The COO EU & BR and the COO NA coordinate their platforms by developing, establishing and implementing the strategic plan for the renewable energy business in their respective platforms, in accordance with the guidelines set by the BOD; they are also responsible for planning, organizing and managing resources, controlling, measuring and improving the management of projects and subsidiary companies to achieve expected results to make EDPR a leader in the renewable energy sector in their respective platforms.  Nominations and Remunerations, Related-Party Transactions and Audit and Control Committees In addition to EC referred above, EDPR governance model contemplates permanent bodies with an informative, advisory and supervisory tasks independently from the BoD, such as:  Nominations and Remunerations Committee (Independent members)  Related-Party Transactions Committee  Audit and Control Committee (Independent members)  Functions  Assist and report to the BoD about appointments, re-elections, dismissals and remunerations of:  Perform the duties of ratifying transactions:  • Members of the BoD • Senior management personnel  • Its related parties, qualified shareholders, directors, key employees or his relatives  32 32  • Between EDPR and EDP  • Propose the appointment of the company’s auditors and the internal risk management and control systems • Supervise internal audits and compliance • Prepare an annual report on its supervisory activities   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Remuneration Policy EDPR governance model is reinforced by an incentive structure with transparent remuneration through variable remuneration based on key performance indicators. The graphic below describes the remuneration policy. For further information on the remuneration policy refer to the Corporate Governance section. Components  Annual Fixed Compensation (Board of Directors)  80%  Variable Compensation (Executive Committee)  Multiannual 120%  3 years deferred payment  The variable remuneration 2014-16 is defined in line with the strategic pillars through 12 KPIs Operational  Economic  • OPEX/MW  • EBITDA  • CAPEX/MW  • ROIC Cash  • Incremental MW  • Net Profit  • Technical Availability  • Asset Rotation & Tax Equity  22%  28%  COOs CEO/CFO/Exec Non-officers Global  45.5%  ESG • Appreciation of the Remuneration Committee • Satisfaction (employees)  39.5%  • Sustainability  17.5%  15% Total Shareholder Return vs. Peers & PSI 20  Note: For COOs, KPIs have a weight of 80% and 68% for the calculation of the annual and multiannual variable compensation respectively. The remaining 20% and 32% are calculated based on a qualitative evaluation of the CEO about the annual performance.  For further detailed information regarding the responsibilities and roles of the different social bodies, as well as 2016 activity, please refer to the Corporate Governance section, at the end of this report. The company also posts its up-todate articles of association and regulations at www.edpr.com  33  33   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  1.3.3. ORGANIZATION STRUCTURE The organization structure is designed to accomplish the strategic management of the company but also a transversal operation of all the business units, ensuring alignment with the defined strategy, optimizing support processes and creating synergies. EDPR is organized around three main elements: a corporate Holding and two platforms that group all the business units where the company has presence. Corporate Holding  Europe & Brazil  North America  Spain  Portugal  France  Belgium  Poland  Romania  United Kingdom  US West  US Central & Mexico  US East & Canada  Brazil  ORGANIZATIONAL MODEL PRINCIPLES The model is designed with several principles in mind to ensure optimal efficiency and value creation. •  Accountability alignment  Critical KPIs and span of control are aligned at project, country, platform and holding level to ensure accountability tracking and to take advantage of complementarities derived from end-to-end process vision.  •  Client-service  Corporate areas function as competence support centers and are internal service providers to all business units for all geographical non-specific needs. Business priorities and needs are defined by local businesses and best practices are defined and distributed by corporate units.  •  Lean organization  Execution of activities at holding level are held only when significant value is derived, coherently with defined EDPR holding role.  •  Collegial decisionmaking  Ensures proper counter-balance dynamics to ensure multiple-perspective challenge across functions.  •  Clear and transparent  Platforms organizational models remain similar to allow for: - Easy coordination, vertically (holding-platforms) and horizontally (across platforms); - Scalability and replicability to ensure efficient integration of future growth.  EDPR HOLDING ROLE EDPR Holding seizes value creation, through the dissemination of best practices in the organization and the standardization of corporate processes to the platforms and the business units to improve efficiency. Its internal coordination model and interface with EDP group impacts both the company’s processes - activities performed, processes steps, inputs and outputs, and decision-making mechanisms -, and the company’s structure, with an alignment of functions and responsibilities with the processes configuration.  34 34   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  The EDPR Holding structure was designed to accomplish two fundamental roles: Strategic Management and Transversal Operation. Strategic Management covers to a) adopt a coordination model within the group, supporting the Executive Committee in the definition and control of the strategy policies and objectives; b) define specific strategic initiatives; c) review the accomplishment of the company’s business plan; d) define transversal policies, rules and procedures; e) control key performance indicators. Transversal Operation deals to i) ensure the alignment of all the platforms with the defined strategy; ii) capture synergies and optimize support processes; and iii) systematically and progressively concentrate supporting activities in shared service business units with the group.  INTEGRITY AND ETHICS Ethical behavior is absolutely essential for the functioning of the economy. EDPR recognizes its importance and complexity, and is committed to address ethics and its compliance. But is employees’ responsibility to comply with ethical obligations. GOVERNANCE MODEL FOR ETHICS Ethics are the cornerstone of EDPR strategy, to the extent that EDPR has a Code of Ethics and an Anti-Corruption regulation that go beyond just defining the company principles to be adopted, but also how employees and any other service provider working on behalf of EDPR should behave when dealing with the company stakeholders. The Code of Ethics has its own regulation that defines a process and channels to report any potential incident or doubt on the application of the code. The Ethics Ombudsman is behind this communication channel, and to analyse and present to the Ethics Committee any potential ethical problem. The code is communicated and distributed to all employees and interested parties, and complemented with tailored training sessions. HOW DO WE APPLY OUR CODE OF ETHICS? EDPR’s Code of Ethics applies to all company employees, regardless of their position in the organization and working location, and they all must comply with. Our suppliers should be aligned with the spirit of our Code of Ethics, and this is reflected in our procurement policies. The Ethics Ombudsman plays an essential role in the ethics process. He guarantees impartiality and objectivity in registering and documenting all complaints of ethical nature submitted to him. He monitors their progress and ensures that the identity of the complainants remains confidential, while entering into contact with them whenever appropriate, until the case is closed. Identify an alleged violation of the code of ethics  Reports of alleged violations of the Code of Ethics must be submitted to the Ethics Ombudsman, indicating personal data and a detailed description of the situation.  Ombudsman performs a summary investigation  Ethics Ombudsman first confirms the events reported and submits a preliminary report on the initial confirmations to the Ethics Committee.  Ethics Committee decides if the complaint portrays a violation  Ethics Committee analyses every situation reported and decides as to whether it should be classified as a violation of the Code of Ethics.  When a violation is confirmed, the Committee opens an investigation  When conducting an investigation, the Company shall abide by the law and its own in-house rules. After the investigation is complete, the Committee decides whether any corrective or disciplinary action is required.  35  35   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  In 2016 there was one communication to the Ethics Ombudsmen through the Ethics Channel. However, it was not considered as an issue related to the Ethics Code and it will be suggested to be rejected during the next Committee Ethics. The issue has been submitted to the responsible area in order to be analyzed and take the corresponding measures. ETHICS PROGRAM EDPR is strongly committed with the dissemination and promotion of compliance with the Code of Ethics , which includes a Human Rights section, available to all employees through training, questionnaires, and open discussions of the findings. To this extent, from March to December 2016, EDP offered an online Ethics training (“Ética EDP") available to all employees of both Europe/Brazil and North America. This course achieved a major participation of around 900 EDPR employees. ANTI-CORRUPTION REGULATION In order to ensure compliance with the standards of Anti-Corruption Regulation in all geographies where EDPR operates, the Company has developed an Anti-Corruption Policy of application to all EDPR Group, which was approved by its Board of Directors on December, 2014. This Anti-Corruption Policy involves a series of new procedures regarding the relationships of EDPR employees with external parties, namely the approval of certain actions regarding hospitality to and from external parties, charitable donations, and sponsorships.  EMPLOYEE RELATIONS EDPR is committed to respect freedom of trade union association and recognises the right to collective bargaining. At EDPR, from 1,083 employees, 21% were covered by collective bargaining agreements. Collective bargaining agreements apply to all employees working under an employment relationship with some companies of EDPR group, regardless of the type of contract, the professional group into which they are classified, their occupation or job. However, matters relating to the corporate organization itself, the laws of each country or even usage and custom in each country result in certain groups being expressly excluded from the scope of collective bargaining agreements. The collective bargaining agreements that are applied at EDPR are usually negotiated at state level or regional level, and EDPR may be just one of the players among other leading sectorial companies in the negotiation with employees’ representatives, and in some cases, governmental representatives. In Portugal and Brazil, EDP negotiates its own agreements with employees, and those apply to all employee working for companies of the group, including EDPR. Despite not taking an active part in the negotiations, EDPR wants to facilitate the broadcast of any update in those agreements. EDPR organized training sessions for its employees to inform about the results of those negotiations. During the last years, EDPR has performed different benchmark analysis of the benefits stated at the different collective bargaining agreements that apply to our employees, comparing them against the benefits offered by the company and, in general terms, the company offers a more competitive benefits package compared to what is stated in the collective bargaining agreement.  36 36   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  2 Strategy  Business Environment The Importance of Renewables The Evolution of Renewables Around the World Supportive Policy Instruments  Business Plan  41 45 46  52  Selective Growth Operational Excellence Self-Funding Model  53 55 57  Risk Management  59  37   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  38   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  39   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  16  40   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  2 Strategy  2.1. Business Environment 2.1.1. THE IMPORTANCE OF RENEWABLES Renewable energy is a fundamental part of the world’s ongoing energy transformation. On the one hand, it is a critical part of reducing global emissions and keeping global temperature increase below 2ºC, as agreed in Paris. On the other hand, renewables are increasingly competitive with conventional technologies while they achieve a myriad of socioeconomic benefits. Hence, renewable energies fuel economic growth, increase energy security, create new employment opportunities, enhance human welfare and contribute to achieve development goals, among other benefits. Necessary to stop climate change and comply with international agreements Human activities are releasing critical amounts of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases (GHG), which trap heat and steadily drive up our planet’s temperature, eventually compromising our climate. Climate scientists agree that human-caused climate change is happening based on massive scientific record and climate change effects are easily observed and are evidenced by data as global temperatures increase of 0.9°C (compared to 1880’s levels), rising sea levels (around 17 cm in the last century) or, noticeable Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets melting. There has been a “step change” in momentum on climate change in the past decade, with large developing countries led by China aiming at reducing their emissions alongside accelerated action by the U.S. under President Barack Obama. The Paris Agreement, ratified in November 2016, aims at avoiding the worst effects of climate change and opens up a path towards a decarbonized economy. As anthropogenic GHG result primarily from the combustion of fossil fuels, effective action in the energy sector is, consequentially, essential to tackle climate change issues. According to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), reaching a 30% renewables share by 2030, coupled with higher energy efficiency, would be enough to prevent global temperatures from rising more than 2°C above preindustrial levels. It is becoming increasingly clear that the investments required to reduce emissions will be modest in comparison with the benefits from avoided climate change damages.  According to IRENA, the cost of doubling the renewable energy share by 2030 would be US$ 290 billion per year which is expected to be at least 4 and up to 15 times less than the external costs avoided.  Therefore, renewable energy is a cornerstone for achieving climate targets and onshore wind, because of its maturity and competitiveness, is expected to be at the forefront of the required transformation of our energy sector.  Renewables are the cheapest option in many parts of the world Nowadays, some renewable’s technologies (wind and solar PV in particular)  are  competitive  with  conventional  technologies.  According to the levelised cost of energy (LCOE), onshore wind already generates the cheapest source of electricity in some regions while solar PV is also becoming increasingly competitive as stated by many experts and prestigious analysts, including Bloomberg Energy Finance, IRENA or Lazard. Despite the substantial cost reduction of onshore wind since the early 1980s, there is still significant further potential for the next decade as costs are  In Spain, according to the Spanish Wind Energy Association, 2016’s average wholesale electricity price would have been 15.3€/MWh higher (28%) if the 23 GW wind fleet had not been producing energy.  expected to keep falling due to improved turbine designs, the use of larger and more reliable turbines, increased hub heights and rotor diameters capable to unlock higher capacity factors at the same wind resource. According to IRENA, by 2025, the LCOE of onshore and offshore wind could see declines of  41  41   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  26% and 35% respectively, while solar PV’s could fall by as much of 59%. Additionally, since renewables energies do not use fossil fuels, they are not exposed to their inherent price volatility, being their LCOE foreseeable and stable.  Levelized Revenue Requirements (€16/MWh):  260-370  190-280  100-120  95-125 60-80  55-110  70-90  90-160  55-85 45-60  CCGT  Coal  Nuclear  Hydro  Wind Onshore  Solar PV  Conventional  Biomass  Wind Offshore  Solar CSP  Ocean  Renewables  Source: EDPR Analysis  The increased competitiveness of wind was highlighted in the latest energy auctions held all over the world: in 2016, the price of wind energy, not only reached historical minimums (below 40US$/MWh), but was often lower than any other technology. On the other hand, increasing the supply of renewable energy tends to lower the average price per unit of electricity because they have very low marginal costs as they do not have to pay for fuel, therefore reducing wholesale prices and ultimately, the cost for consumers.  Fundamental pillar of sustainability and energy independence The limitless nature of wind resource contributes to its sustainability: the use of wind resource allows to slow down the pace of fossil fuel depletion and to maintain the balance between the existing natural resources and their consumption, besides having a reduced environmental impact as they do not pollute or generate waste, contributes to air quality and does not require water or fuels. Another advantage is that wind resource is also endogenous, improving countries’ energy supply security by decreasing the vulnerability of many countries due to interruption or alteration of the energy supply and enhances the energy independence, bringing significant cost savings by reducing gas and oil imports. This is very relevant for most of the countries, particularly in Europe, as the largest share of fossil fuel reserves is concentrated in a small number of countries (mainly in the Middle East).  A driver for growth and regional development Renewable energy generates wealth, support the creation of new jobs and strengthen industrial network. Compared with fossil fuel technologies, which are typically mechanized and capital intensive, the renewable energy industry is more labour-intensive as on average, more jobs are created for each unit of electricity generated from renewable sources than from fossil fuels. According to IRENA, the renewable sector employs, directly and indirectly, over 8 million of people around the word, of which, the wind sector represents more than 1 million jobs. Since most of the facilities are in rural areas, wind energy creates local wealth: the largest share of the jobs created are local and local taxes, in particular, land taxes, often represent a large share of the income of the municipalities in which wind farms are built. In developing countries, renewables are becoming increasingly important: an estimated 1.2 billion people still do not have access to electricity according to IEA, which severely jeopardizes their well-being and economic development, presenting a strong case for increased deployment of renewables, since off-grid renewable solutions offer the most cost-effective way to extend energy access to all.  Improved public health and environmental quality Building wind and solar facilities helps to improve public health mainly by displacing noxious emissions from coal-fired power plants. Air pollution is becoming a severe problem in many regions of the world, in particular in big cities, due to smog, which is highly toxic for the health, reduce visibility and contribute to acid rain, which can damage vegetation and crops. Air pollution has emerged as the deadliest form of pollution and the fourth leading risk factor for premature deaths worldwide, according to the World Bank. Those deaths cost the global economy about US$225 billion, the World Bank study finds, pointing toward the economic burden of air pollution.  42 42   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  PARIS AGREEMENT ALREADY RATIFIED BY COUNTRIES THAT REPRESENT AROUND 89% OF THE WORLDWIDE EMISSIONS The global low-carbon transition is already underway and gaining momentum, following the adoption of the first universal climate change agreement and its ratification in November 2016. The Paris Climate Change Agreement, the result of the most intricate, farreaching and critical international climate negotiation ever attempted, came  Countries that already signed the COP21 agreement  into force the 4th November 2016, much earlier than expected thanks to the early ratification of a large number of countries. The Agreement is undoubtedly a turning point in the history, cementing the  70  combined political, economic and social will of governments, cities, regions, corporations and citizens to avoid the worst effects of climate change.  Ratified  The Paris Agreement sparked an unprecedented wave of action and pledges to boost renewable energy industry all around the world. But even if  127  Signed and awaiting ratification  undoubtedly the Paris Agreement gave hope, 2016 was also marked by unprecedented climate concerns. On the one side, 2016 was the hottest year on record and a new high for the third year in a row, according to the UN. Additionally, the World Meteorological Organization has now confirmed that  Weight of emissions by signatory country  the average global concentration in the atmosphere of the main greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide, reached the symbolic and significant milestone of 400 parts per million for the first time in 2015 and broke new records in 2016.  Others (not ratified, incl. Russia) US & Canada  11%  China  Against this backdrop, non-State actors are increasingly aware of the need  India  to address climate change. The preparation of the Paris Agreement has  UE  shown that fighting against climate change is no longer an issue for governments to solve alone and that companies have a key role to play.  Japan  Spurred by rising expectations of society and corporate targets, an  Brazil  increasing number of companies have grasped the challenges and opportunities of moving towards a low-carbon economy and addressing  Others (ratified)  climate change is becoming a key part of their corporate strategy. In the US, for example, corporate buyers (including Google, Facebook, Amazon, Apple and many others), contracted for almost 2.5 GW of new renewable energy PPA capacity in 2016. The electricity sector will play a central role in the transition towards a low-carbon economy. It can almost totally eliminate CO2 emissions by producing electricity from renewable sources, and offers the prospect of partially replacing fossil fuels in transport and heating. Indeed, according to “Climate Action Tracker”, which provides independent scientific analysis, all 1.5°C pathways foresee a fully decarbonized power system by 2050, which implies a power system consisting entirely of renewables and other zero or low carbon sources.  What is the Paris Agreement? It is a climate accord reached by nearly 200 countries in December 2015. The Agreement commits world leaders to keeping global warming below 2°C seen as the threshold to avoid the worst effects of climate change, and endeavor to pursue a safer target of 1.5°C. Each country submitted national pledges to achieve the goals and the agreement includes a mechanism for periodical revisions of those targets. The agreement also include a long-term goal for a net zero emissions, which could effectively phase out fossil fuels. The accord also places a legal obligation to provide climate finance to developing countries.  43  43   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  YES TO WIND POWER In the wake of the of success of the Yes to Wind Power campaign launched in 2015 in Spain, it grew in 2016 by expanding into the markets of Italy, Romania, Poland and France. In order to demonstrate the benefits of renewable energy, especially wind power, the campaign aims above all to show that renewable energy is the most effective way to mitigate climate change in the short term and fulfill commitments made at COP21. In addition, it highlights the competitiveness of this type of energy. To inform society about these issues, this social media campaign centered on the Energy Hipster character who, in 2016, began answering questions and sharing the answers with the entire community on Facebook and Twitter. Through the Energy Hipster and the campaign webpage, journalists, opinion leaders and the general public across these four countries had access, in their language, to up-to-date scientific information in a format easy to read and understand.  Campaign publications in Poland, Spain, Italy and Romania:  Total number of campaign impacts: 2,580,769  (doubled compared to the previous year).  Twitter: 4,462,785 hashtag impacts l Generation of a community of 1,280 fans Facebook: 73% increase in community size YOY l Publication reach of 1,569,001  44 44   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  2.1.2. THE EVOLUTION OF RENEWABLES AROUND THE WORLD Wind According to Global Wind Energy Council (GWEC), 54.7 GW of wind capacity were grid-connected in 2016, bringing total global installed capacity to nearly 487 GW. Once again, China led wind power installations with 23.3 GW of new capacity, below 2015’s spectacular results (30 GW) though, raising its total wind installed capacity to 169 GW. With 0.6 GW offshore capacity installed in 2016, China overcame Denmark and achieved third place in global offshore rankings, after UK and Germany. The US was the second largest wind market with an additional 8.2 GW, bringing the US cumulative capacity to 82.2 GW, surpassing hydropower capacity to become the largest source of renewable capacity and the fourth largest overall. By state, Texas connected 2.6 GW in 2016, followed by Oklahoma (1.5 GW) and Iowa (0.7 GW). With these additions Texas remains the largest wind State, outstripping the 20 GW landmark, followed by Iowa (6.9 GW) and California (5.7 GW). US also commissioned its first offshore wind project, the 30 MW Block Island project off the coast of Rhode Island. In Europe, renewable energy sources made up nearly 90% of capacity additions, a sign of the continent’s rapid shift away from fossil fuels. For the first time, wind overtook coal and became the second largest source of power generation capacity only behind natural gas, which is particularly impressive as ten years ago it was only the sixth technology. In 2016, wind facilities made up more than half of Europe's new power capacity and met 10.4% of total electricity demand. According to Wind Europe, 12.5 GW  Almost 90% of new power in Europe from renewable sources in 2016  of wind were installed during 2016 in EU, of which 1.6 GW were offshore, representing together 51% of all new capacity. These results make cumulative installed capacity in Europe amounting to 153.7 GW of wind, of which 12.6 GW are offshore, cementing the European leadership. Germany was again the largest market with 5.4 GW of new capacity (of which 0.8 GW were offshore) and France came second with a record year of 1.6 GW, followed by Turkey (1.4 GW) and Netherlands (0.9 GW, of which 0.7 GW offshore). In terms of cumulative capacity, Germany maintains its leadership with 50.0 GW, followed by Spain (23.1 GW), UK (14.5 GW), France (12.1 GW) and Italy (9.3 GW). In Latin America, 2016 was a remarkable year for Brazil that installed 2.0 GW and surpassed 10 GW of wind installed capacity. Chile added 0.5 GW reaching 1.4 GW of capacity while Mexico connected 0.5 GW closing the year with 3.5 GW. Other emerging economies that achieved very good results were India, setting a new national record of 3.6 GW and consolidating its position as fourth largest wind market, South Africa (0.4 GW) and Pakistan (0.3 GW).  Solar 2016 was an outstanding year for solar PV with 76.1 GW of capacity additions which compares with 51.2 GW in 2015. The largest market was China, which added 34.2 GW, an 125% increase versus 2015. US ranked second with estimated additions of 14 GW, up from 7.3 GW in the previous year and Japan and India were the following markets adding, respectively 8.6 and 4.5 GW. European countries installed around 6.9 GW of solar power in 2016, a 20% decrease compared to the 8.6 GW that was installed in the previous year, according to Solar Power Europe. The growth was mainly driven by the UK, Germany, Turkey and France.  “2016 will be remembered as the year that the first solar PPAs were signed at levels that have made solar the lowest-cost power in many regions of the world”, James Watson (Solar Power Europe CEO)  45  45   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  2.1.3. SUPPORTIVE POLICY INSTRUMENTS A wide range of remuneration schemes has traditionally supported Renewables’ projects. However, the most frequent schemes are: •  FEED-IN TARIFF (FIT) SYSTEMS: most popular scheme due to its simplicity and visibility for investors, where generators receive either a fixed payment for each unit of electricity generated regardless of the market price, or a payment on top of market price (“Feed-in premium” and “Contract-for-difference” schemes).  •  QUOTA OBLIGATIONS: on top of the market price, generators receive certificates for their final energy ("Green Certificates" or "GC") which can be sold to the offtakers obliged to fulfil a quota obligation (a share of energy that must be sourced from renewable sources), therefore providing additional income to the generators.  •  TENDERS AND AUCTIONS: are becoming increasingly popular, they do not represent a support category per se as they are used to allocate financial support to different renewables technologies and to determine the support level of other types of support schemes, such as feed-in systems, in a competitive bidding procedure.  •  OTHER: includes investment grants, low interest loans and tax exemptions to support renewables.  The table below describes the overall current regulation in the geographies where EDPR operates. Country  US  Canada  Spain  Portugal  France  United Kingdom  46 46  Short Description • Sales can be agreed under PPAs (up to 20 years), Hedges or Merchant prices • Renewable Energy Credits (REC) subject to each state regulation • PTC (wind-projects): collected for 10-years since COD ($23/MWh in 2016). Phase out for projects that start construction post 2016 (no PTC post 2019 projects). Projects have 4 years to be placed in service in order to qualify. • ITC: 30% ITC for solar projects and new wind-projects can opt for ITC instead of PTC. Phase out for wind projects follows a similar scheme of the PTC. Phase out for solar projects (projects put in place after 2023 will qualify for just 10% ITC)  Country  Belgium  Poland  • Feed-in Tariff (Ontario) • Duration: 20-years  • Wind energy receives pool price and a premium per MW, if necessary, in order to achieve a target return established as the Spanish 10-year Bond yields plus 300bps • Premium calculation is based on standard assets (standard load factor, production and costs) • New assets are remunerated by a premium awarded through competitive auctions • Old regime (before 2006): feed-in Tariff inversely correlated with load factor throughout the year. Duration: 15 years (Feed-in tariff updated monthly with inflation) and possibility to obtain an extension in exchange of upfront payments or discounts on existing tariffs • New regime (after 2006): price defined through competitive tenders • Feed-in tariff for 15 years: • First 10 years: receive €82/MWh; inflation type indexation • Years 11-15: depending on load factor receive €82/MWh @2,400 hours decreasing to €28/MWh @3,600 hours; inflation type indexation • New assets will be remunerated through a Contract-for-Difference scheme • Market price plus Green Certificate ("Renewable Obligation Certificate") system in place since 2002 • The GC system will be closed in 2017 and is being gradually replaced by a Contract-for-difference scheme awarded through competitive tenders  Romania  Italy  Brazil  Short Description • Market price plus green certificate (GC) system • Separate GC prices with cap and floor for Wallonia (€65/MWh-100/MWh) • System to adjust the number of GC per MWh according to a predefined profitability level • Option to negotiate long-term PPAs • Electricity price can be established through bilateral contracts or selling to distributor at regulated price (PLN 171.14/MWh in 4Q 2016) • Wind receive 1 GC/MWh which can be traded in the market. Electric suppliers have a substitution fee for non compliance with GC obligation. In 2016, the substitution fee was set at PLN300/MWh • New assets will be remunerated by a Contract-for-Difference awarded through competitive auctions  • Wind assets (installed until 2013) receive 2 GC/MWh until 2017 and 1 GC/MWh after 2017 until completing 15 years. 1 out of the 2 GC earned until Mar-2017 can only be sold from Jan-2018 and until Dec-2020. Solar assets receive 6 GC/MWh for 15 years. 2 out of the 6 GC earned until Mar-2017 can only be sold after Apr-2017 and until Dec-2020. GC are tradable on market under a cap and floor system • Wind assets (installed after 2013) receive 1.5 GC/MWh until 2017 and after 0.75 GC/MWh until completing 15 years.  • Wind farms in operation prior to the end of 2012 are remunerated under a pool + premium scheme applicable for the first 15 years of operation • Wind farms commissioned from 2013 onwards: competitive tenders with a 20-year PPA • Old installed capacity under a feed-in tariff program ("PROINFA") • Since 2008, competitive auctions awarding 20-years PPAs   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  EUROPE: REDESIGNING POWER MARKETS FOR DECARBONISATION On the 30th November 2016, The European Commission (EC) presented the Clean Energy legislative package, the so-called “Winter Package”, unveiling the post-2020 EU regulatory framework. The proposals represent a key piece of the EC’s pledge to create an EU-wide Energy Union and includes five main areas: Renewable Energy Directive, Market Design review, Governance, Efficiency and Security of Supply. The package consists of eight legislative proposals, including the “Energy Union Governance Regulation” and a new “Renewable Energy Directive”, together with four non-legislative documents and nine other reports and initiatives. All the legislative proposals still need the approval of the  2030 targets  European Parliament and the Council of the European Union, which could materialize at the end of 2018. The  “Renewable  Energy  Directive”  seeks  to  cement  40% GHG reduction versus 1990  27% share of renewable energy  commitments made in the Paris Agreement, where the EU  European target, binding at national level  pledged to cut GHG (greenhouse gases) by 40% on 1990 levels  30% energy savings  European target, non binding at national level  by 2030 and increase by 27% its share of renewables. Proposals also include plans to increase energy efficiency levels by 30% by 2030. The EC, as part of the new governance framework, will monitor the completion of the climate and energy 2030 targets. In view to fulfil the targets, Member States (MS) will be required to develop “2030 National Energy and climate plans” in which each MS will set the pathway to deliver their objectives. If those plans do not add up to the EU’s binding target,  “We are on the brink of a clean energy revolution” (Miguel Arias Cañete, EU Commissioner for Climate Action and Energy)  the EC will be able to trigger measures at EU level to fill the gap. The new Renewable Energy Directive proposal also advocates for 3 years of visibility for renewable energy support, as it requires MS to define at least a 3year schedule for the allocation of support, including timing, capacity and budget. It also requires MS to ensure that any modification of their support scheme does not negatively affect the economics of renewable energy projects.  The 2030 targets imply that almost half of electricity in Europe will be generated by renewables in 2030. The EC acknowledges this fact and seeks to integrate renewables into power markets, enhancing their flexibility while making them fit for an increasingly share of variable generation.  The most relevant recent regulatory developments in the European countries where EDPR is present are below described (for additional information, please refer to Note 01 of EDPR Consolidated Annual Accounts).  SPAIN On January 2016, the first auction of renewables’ capacity was held, designed to provide a similar remuneration scheme to the one that applies to current installations (ruled by RD 413/2014). Following this framework, tender participants were requested to bid discounts on the “initial investment” parameter that determines the “investment premium” that would eventually be awarded. The auction was very competitive, around 5 times oversubscribed for onshore wind. EDP Renováveis was awarded 93 MW of wind energy. The Spanish Government announced a new renewables’ capacity auction for the first months of 2017 requiring projects to be completed by December 2019.  PORTUGAL On October 2016, the Portaria 268-B/2016 on the clawback of non-refundable subsidies received from public development programs was published.  47  47   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  FRANCE On April 2016, the government enacted the “Programmation Pluriannuelle des Investissements” which set renewables’ capacity targets by technology, including a provisional timetable of the renewable tenders to be launched until 2019. A new Contract-for-difference (CfD) scheme was released in December 2016 for wind farms having requested a PPA in 2016. The strike price will be equal to the value of the current feed-in-tariff (similar tenure, indexation and adjustment after year 10), plus a management fee to compensate balancing costs (2.8€/MWh). The market reference price will be the production weighted average Day Ahead Market price, using a representative production profile for wind industry. It was also disclosed the draft decree for the 2017 CfD for wind farms with less than six wind turbines, where the CfD tenure extended from 15 to 20 years, being the strike price of 72€/MWh plus the management fee.  ITALY Final approval of the new Decree envisaging tenders for 2016 in June. This decree follows the provisions of 2011 Italian RES (Renewable Energy Sources) Law and as such, although with some small adjustments, is very similar to the one approved in 2012 which set the framework for the first three onshore wind tenders. The new decree envisaged one sole 800 MW onshore wind tender. The Energy Agency of Italy, Gestore dei Servizi Energetici (GSE) released in December 2016 a list of projects that won offtake contracts in 2016 tender. EDP Renováveis won PPAs for 6 wind farms totaling 127 MW with an awarded price of 66€/MWh and in case the realized market price is lower than the awarded price, the difference will be paid by GSE.  POLAND On June 2016 the so-called “Wind Turbine Investment Act” was approved, introducing, among other measures, new minimum distance restrictions for new wind farms and increased real estate burden. Also on June 2016, some amendments of the RES Act Chapter 4 were approved. Although the core of the new auction system remained unchanged, some modifications were introduced, namely technology baskets for future tenders, improving the treatment of biomass, biogas and cofiring technologies. On November 2016, the Polish government disclosed a draft ordinance detailing the amount and value of energy planned to be auctioned in 2017. The draft states that baseload renewables (dedicated biomass and biogas) will have a share of around 50% of the total 2017’s auction budget but new onshore wind could also compete for an amount up to 150 MW.  ROMANIA The Romanian government approved the draft ordinance setting a quota of 8.3% for 2017. On October 2016, the Ministry of Energy published for consultation a draft amendment to the current RES Law and released a new draft in November, incorporating some improvements over the previous version. Among other amendments, an extension of the GC scheme until 2031, a removal of the indexation of the GC parameters and the extension of the GC recovery for wind energy from 2018 to 2025. Regarding PV projects, the draft amendments propose an extension of the GC postponement until end of 2024, fixing the recovery from 2025 to 2030.  UNITED KINGDOM In November 2016, the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) released details on the next CfD round. The second allocation round is expected to begin in April 2017 with projects to compete for GBP 290 million of annual support for the delivery years 2021/22 and 2022/23 (although offshore projects might be phased up to two years subsequent to 2022/23). It will only include less established technologies, as offshore wind. The administrative strike price for offshore wind is set at 105 GBP/MWh for projects deploying in 2021/2022 and 100 GBP/MWh for projects deploying in 2022/2023.  48 48   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  NORTH AMERICA TO CONTINUE LEADING THE WAY Historically, the typical framework of wind development in the US has been decentralized, with no national feed-in tariff, involving the combination of three key drivers of the top line: •  PTCs: production tax credits are the dominant form of wind incentives in the US, and represent an extra source of revenue per unit of electricity ($23/MWh in 2016), over the first 10 years of the asset’s life.  •  ITCs: investment tax credits equal to 30% of the initial capex are the primary incentive for solar.  •  PPAs: long-term, bilateral power purchase agreements by which a wind developer can sell its output at a fixed price, usually adjusted for a negotiated escalator.  In addition, many states have passed legislation, principally in the form of renewable portfolio standards (RPS), which require utilities to purchase a certain percentage of their energy supply from renewable sources, setting penalties to those that do not comply. Utilities can invest directly in renewable generation assets, purchase electricity from other renewable generators or purchase RECs. As a result, many utilities setup auction systems to seek long-term power purchase agreements with renewable energy generators. The relevant recent regulatory developments in North America are below described (for additional information on, please refer to Note 01 of EDPR Consolidated Annual Accounts).  UNITED STATES On December 2015, the US Congress approved the "Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016" that included an extension of the PTC for wind and the possibility of a 30% ITC instead of PTC and the extension of the ITC for solar. The Congress introduced a phase out of the credits. Wind projects that start construction in 2020 or late will not have PTC or ITC and solar projects placed in service after 2023 will qualify to just 10% ITC. The graphic below depicts the phase-out calendar:  Start of construction... 2016  2017  2018  Start of construction... 2019  2020  2021  2022  2023  2016  ...  2020  2021  ...end of construction  100% 30%  2022  2023  >2023  ...end of construction 30%  80% 24%  26% 60% 18%  22% 40% 12%  PTC (Wind): % of full PTC ($23/MWh in 2016)  10%  ITC (Solar): % of Capex  ITC (Wind): % of Capex  On May 2016, the US Internal Revenue Service (IRS) issued guidance that wind farms have 4 years from their start of construction to be placed in service and qualify for the PTC. As a result, projects that start construction prior to yearend 2019 and are placed in service prior to year-end 2023 will be eligible for the PTC. The IRS ruling also includes a provision that allows developers to secure the PTC if 5% of a project's capital components by dollar value are safe harbored in a given year and construction is complete within 4 years. Thus, if a developer safe harbors 5% of project Capex in 2016 for a given project, the project will qualify for 100% PTC if construction is completed by year-end 2020. On August 2015, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced the Clean Power Plan (CPP), a rule to cut carbon pollution from existing power plants. On February 2016, the Supreme Court stayed implementation of the CPP pending judicial review and as of year-end 2016, the review process is ongoing with the DC Circuit Court. A ruling is widely expected by mid-2017, however it is expected to be appealed to the Supreme Court regardless of outcome. Regarding RPS, some states have upgraded their targets in 2015 and 2016: California and New York targeted 50% renewables by 2030, Oregon upgraded their RPS to 50% by 2040, Vermont enacted an RPS of 75% by 2032 and Michigan upgraded their RPS to 15% by 2021. In 2016, both New Jersey and Massachusetts proposed (but as of year-end 2016  49  49   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  had not yet adopted) to upgrade their RPS standards to 80% by 2050. Illinois supplemented its existing RPS standard by passing an energy bill to require utilities to source at least 4TWh of new wind and 4TWh of new solar by 2030. RPS obligations as a percent of state retail consumption is shown in the table below. RPS objective  2016  RPS objective  14.2%  Montana  24.4%  California  2025  5.7%  Arizona  40.5%  Nevada  2016  2025  7.1%  7.1%  16.6%  20.8%  Colorado  14.1%  21.7%  New Hampshire  15.3%  22.7%  Connecticut  19.9%  25.6%  New Jersey  14.4%  23.4%  Delaware  11.9%  22.8%  New Mexico  11.5%  15.8%  District of Columbia  13.9%  26.0%  New York  28.4%  30.6%  Hawaii  14.8%  24.7%  North Carolina  5.7%  11.3%  Illinois  8.2%  19.2%  Ohio  2.0%  9.1%  Indiana  3.2%  8.0%  Oregon  11.5%  22.2%  Maine  36.6%  37.5%  Pennsylvania  13.0%  17.1%  Maryland  14.5%  21.4%  Rhode Island  9.4%  22.1%  Massachusetts  13.7%  21.1%  Texas  5.0%  8.6%  Michigan  10.2%  10.2%  Vermont  0.0%  79.5%  Minnesota  20.7%  28.4%  Washington  4.5%  7.7%  3.6%  10.9%  Wisconsin  9.6%  9.6%  Missouri  GROWTH PROSPECTS Growth in the US is motivated by several forces, including primarily the planned coal capacity retirements, RPS compliance in several states and demand from commercial and industrial entities.  29 states + DC  Renewable Standards Portfolio  RPS  • Defined at state level • RPS policies cover 55% of total US retail electricity sales • 5 states increased quotas in 2016 (OR; IL; MI; NY; DC)  Utilities  • Officially announced: coal-fired plants being shuttered • Old & non-compliant w/ environmental constraints; independent of CO2 issues • 23% of coal fleet retired or announced prior 2030  27 GW  Coal Retirement Until 2030E; 49 GW since 2010  >50% PPAs signed 2015  Utilities’ Portfolio Demand  Commercial & Industrial Entities  C&I  • Non-utilities companies incl. techs, industrials, cooperatives... • Fixed-long-term price protected from fuel price fluctuations • 80 companies have pledged to move to 100% renewable power  CANADA New Canadian renewable supply through 2020 is backed by new targets in Alberta and Saskatchewan along with existing IESO contracts in Ontario.  MEXICO Mexico is redesigning its energy sector beginning with the constitutional amendment in 2013 and ending with implementation by end of 2018. The reforms bring about the end of state-owned vertically-integrated monopolies and open the door to significant opportunities for private sector participation across the supply chains for oil and gas and for electricity. Mexico’s energy reforms advanced significantly in 2016 to implement changes that provide remuneration for all forms of generation including wind and solar. The key mechanisms of interest to renewable developers are the implementation of the wholesale electricity market, long-term supply auctions for supply, and financial transmission rights. Two long-term supply auctions have been conducted to date with a third planned for April 2017.  50 50   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  THE AGE OF AUCTIONS HAS ARRIVED In recent years, the renewable energy sector has undergone a profound transformation, as the sector has witnessed a rapid decline of wind and solar PV costs, a high penetration of renewable sources, a greater competition among players and technologies, a massive adoption of renewable targets and more stringent state-aid rules, among other changes. To adjust to these trends, support mechanisms have adapted so that they ensure greater deployment of renewables in a cost-effective manner. In this context, auctions, alone or in combination with other support schemes have often become the preferred option. Indeed, these schemes allow to control renewables’ volume deployment (in particular to avoid uncontrolled surge of new facilities) while decreasing the chances of governments over-subsidizing the sector because of a lack of information. Latin America is probably the region with the larger experience of auctions for renewable energy. Brazil alone has contracted more than 20 GW. Other countries, most notably Peru, Chile, Mexico, Argentina and Uruguay have also held renewable auctions in the last years. In Europe, there has been an increasingly interest in auctions, reinforced by regulation. Indeed, the “European Commission State Aid Guidelines for Environmental Protection and Energy 2014-2020” obliges all Member States to set up competitive bidding processes to grant support to all new facilities by January 2017, with only few exceptions. Renewable developers are embracing auctions as a way to secure predictable cash flows and therefore, mitigate price volatility and regulatory risk. 2016 was a year of record for low price auctions all around the world: for instance, in wind technology Morocco (below 30 US$/MWh) and Peru (below 40 US$/MWh) are good examples, or in solar PV, prices fell to historic lows in Chile. However, the most unexpected low figures probably came from offshore projects, which have witnessed astonishing low prices like the ones in the latest offshore tender in Denmark, although the price is not directly comparable to those awarded in the UK, as the former exclude grid connections costs and are located at shallower depths, but are nevertheless substantially lower. Another example was the 700 MW of offshore wind capacity awarded by the Dutch Government in December 2016, which resulted in a 25% reduction compared to the previous auction (only a few months earlier) of neighboring projects.  Overview of 2016 selected tenders Wind onshore  Denmark €49.9/MWh  Wind offshore  Germany €72.3/MWh  Solar PV Netherlands €54.5/MWh  Italy €66/MWh India $US 65.9/MWh Mexico $US 32/MWh  Chile $US 29.1/MWh  Morocco $US 25.5/MWh  Abu Dhabi $US 24.2/MWh  Australia $AU 73/MWh  Source: BNEF and EDPR Analysis  51  51   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  2.2. Business Plan EDPR’s value creation strategic plan through 2020 remains in line with previous architecture, supported by three pillars with defined goals: Selective Growth, Operational Excellence and Self-funding Model. On May 2016, EDPR presented to the financial community its Business Plan for 2016-20 at the EDP Group Investor Day held in London. In the event were present several financial markets participants, including press, online participants, investors, analysts and rating agencies, demonstrating a great interest from the financial community in the group’s equity story and strategy. EDPR increased its 2014-17 Business Plan into a new Business Plan with stronger capacity additions and technological mix. Since its inception, EDPR has been performing a strategy focused on selective growth, by investing in quality projects with predictable future cash-flows, and seamless execution, supported by core competences that yield superior profitability, all embedded within a distinctive and renowned self-funding model designed to accelerate value creation. As a result of undertaking such strategy, at the same time flexible enough to accommodate to changing business and economic environments, EDPR remains today a global leading company in the renewable energy industry. EDPR 2020 investment case to continue to be supported by a distinctive strategic agenda which is being successfully delivered in order to outperform its 2016-20 goals.  Selective Growth  Operational Excellence  Self-funding Business  Solid value creation, investing in quality projects with predictable cash-flow stream  Profitable growth supported by distinctive core competences and unique know-how  Enhanced growth by an asset rotation program designed to accelerate value creation  Prioritize quality investments in EDPR core markets  c. 700 MW/year  Technical expertise to maximize production  >97.5% availability  Investing in visible growth opportunities  €4.8bn investments  High visibility on projects with long term contracts awarded  >65% till 2020  Competitive projects leading to a superior load factor  33% in 2020  Profitable assets generating robust Retained Cash Flow  €3.9bn RCF  Technological mix initiatives  Solar & Offshore  Unique O&M strategy to keep lowering Core Opex/MW  -1% CAGR  Asset Rotation strategy to keep enhancing value growth  up to € 1.1bn  2015-20  €550m executed c.€600m new  EDPR business model set to deliver predictable and solid growth targets in core markets… Electricity Output  EBITDA  RCF  Net Profit  Dividend Pay-out  10% CAGR 15-20  8% CAGR 15-201  €0.9bn 2020E  16% CAGR 15-201  25-35%  …positioning to successfully lead a sector with increased worldwide relevance 1  Considers 2015 figures adjusted by non-recurrent events: €1.07bn at EBITDA and €108m Net Income.  52 52   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  2.2.1. SELECTIVE GROWTH The selective growth strategic pillar is the key principle behind EDPR’s investment selection process, it ensures that the projects that are finally built have the best fit with the Company’s low risk profile at superior profitability. This strategy is part of the 2016-20 Business Plan growth options, as projects have been selected according to two key guidelines: 1) Low risk profile – New capacity benefits from long-term PPAs already secured or long-term contracts awarded under stable regulatory frameworks. This guarantees high visibility of the project’s future cash-flows, reducing risk and locking-in project profitability. 2) High operational performance – The projects selected exhibit strong operating metrics, namely above portfolio average load factor which improves  Capacity Additions (MW; %) 10%  65%  10%  15%  700 MW/year 2016-20  North America  project competitiveness and drives higher profitability.  Europe  EDPR is well on track to deliver on its business plan target growth of +3.5 GW  Solar PV  cumulative from 2016 to 2020 (700 MW/year) – with 65% of the cumulative capacity additions target already secured and 820 MW installed in 2016. EDPR’s  Brazil  Total of 3.5 GW capacity additions  extensive pipeline has been an important contributing factor to the successful execution of this strategy as the availability of multiple projects coupled with strong development expertise guarantees that only the best, fully optimized projects are finally selected for investment.  65% GROWTH FROM NORTH AMERICA, DRIVEN BY PPAs ALREADY SECURED The United States is EDPR main growth driver for the 2016-20 Business Plan timeframe. The visibility over Production Tax Credit (PTC) tax scheme, the strong demand from both utilities and commercial and industrial companies for longterm PPAs from wind energy projects, combined with EDPR’s diversified portfolio of projects in this market support this solid growth opportunity. The December 2015 extension of the PTC, that includes a gradual phase out of the PTC value for projects that start construction before 2020, provides long-term visibility to US growth beyond 2016-20 for new wind energy projects, reinforces the strong fundamentals of the US wind market and supports EDPR’s choice to shift growth to the US. The Business Plan for 2016-20 targets 1.8 GW of wind onshore additions in the US, of which 1.1 GW were already secured as of December 2016 and are entitled to receive 100% PTC value. More than 55% of these projects were signed with non-utilities companies, another key driver of the US market. Previously the demand for PPAs came only from traditional utilities, however, recently the direct procurement from corporations has increased substantially, adding new demand for EDPR’s US wind and solar projects. In addition, it is worth mentioning that EDPR secured turbine components in 2016 in order to have the option to further increase its capacity and install up to 3.1 GW of wind projects until 2020, benefitting from 100% of the PTC value. In 2014 EDPR entered the Mexican market by signing a bilateral long-term supply agreement, for the energy produced by a 200 MW wind farm which was completed in 2016, representing a sizeable entry in an attractive market. Mexico is a country with great potential for wind energy and this achievement can provide a solid platform for further growth. In 2016 EDPR was also awarded a 20-year PPA in Ontario, Canada, which is already under development and expected to be commissioned by 2019.  53  53   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  US and wind onshore at the core of EDPR growth strategy 157 MW  US Capacity additions (GW) 60%  (CoD 2016/17)  Project Name MW  State  Hidalgo  250  Texas  100  Ohio  2016  Jericho  78 79  New York 2017  Meadow Lake V  100  Indiana  100 MW  (CoD 2016)  New York 2016  Arkwright  200 MW  2016  Timber Road III  1.8 GW 2016-20  98 MW  (CoD 2017)  CoD  2017  Quilt Block  98 99  Secured  200  Iowa  Meadow Lake VI  75  Indiana  99 MW  (CoD 2017)  2018  Under negotiation/identified  (CoD 2017/18)  Oklahoma 2017  Turtle Creek  175 MW  Wisconsin 2017  Red Bed  (CoD 2018)  2018  Option to grow 3.1 GW with safe harbor  1.1 GW already secured >55% secured with non-utilities  250 MW  (CoD 2016)  15% GROWTH FROM EUROPE, FOCUSING ON LOW RISK FRAMEWORKS Certain European markets continue to provide good growth opportunities supported by regulatory frameworks that provide low risk environment. For the 2016-20 Business Plan, EDPR growth in Europe represents c.15% of the planned capacity additions, a growth supported by identified short-term opportunities and medium-term pipeline options. In terms of additions by country, EDPR has very focused targets. Firstly, in Portugal, 216 MW will be added with a 20-year feed-in tariff. Then Italy with c.200 MW target additions, of which 44 MW installed in 2016 and 127 MW awarded as a 20-year contracts in December 2016 to be installed in 2018. In France, existing feed-in tariff regime provides a stable growth opportunity, driving EDPR targeted additions to c.100 MW through pipeline development, of which 24 MW were already installed by December 2016. Finally, in Spain, EDPR was awarded in January 2016, rights for the pre-registry of 93 MW of wind energy capacity in the renewable energy auction.  10% FROM BRAZIL, IN PROJECTS WITH LONG-TERM PPAs In Brazil, EDPR already installed 120 MW related to Baixa do Feijão project, which was completed on the first quarter of 2016. On the top of that, EDPR is developing 267 MW, awarded in 2013-15, to be installed in 2017-18. These are projects with load factors above 45% and with PPAs linked to inflation, representing a mid/high double digit project IRR. Additionally, EDPR is to remain actively prospecting opportunities in Brazil, namely auction opportunities, given the strong fundamentals of the country, with high growth of electricity demand, robust renewable resources and availability of long-term energy supply agreements through an auction system.  TECHNOLOGICAL MIX 10% GROWTH IN SOLAR, GIVEN ITS INCREASING COMPETITIVENESS In order to take advantage of every profitable renewable technology and considering its increasing competitiveness, EDPR included in its 2016-20 Business Plan a 10% of growth in PV solar technology. The US is the core market for this growth, where  10% +3.5 GW 2016-20  the technology is boosted by the Investment Tax Credit (ITC) scheme, while in Europe, Brazil and Mexico developing options are based on projects’ fundamentals.  Wind onshore 90%  Solar  ALREADY INVESTING IN OFFSHORE WIND TECHNOLOGY Offshore projects are being developed by EDPR, to support growth options and  10%  to capture this new wave of industry development and industry leadership. These projects, located in the UK and France, are expected to start operations  €4.8bn  2016-20  beyond the 2016-20 Business Plan, but are already being developed through Wind onshore & solar 90%  54 54  partnerships, from which the company is also able to further develop  Offshore  technological expertise in a sector with such huge future prospects.   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  2.2.2. OPERATIONAL EXCELLENCE One of the strategic pillars that has always been a keystone of the company, setting it apart in the industry, is the drive to maximize the operational performance of its wind and solar plants. In this area, EDPR’s teams, namely in operations and maintenance (O&M), have established a strong track record that supports challenging targets set in the 2016-20 Business Plan. For this period, EDPR has set targets for three key metrics: Load Factor and Technical Availability, along with optimization of Core Opex1 per MW. These metrics provide an overall view of the progress in EDPR wind assessment, O&M and cost control efforts. They also serve as good indicators for the overall operational efficiency of the company. BP 2016-20  Operational Excellence Targets  Technical Availability  Load Factor  >97.5%  33%  -1%  in 2020  CAGR 2015-20  Competitive projects leading to a superior load factor  Unique O&M strategy to keep lowering Core Opex/MW  Technical expertise to maximize production  Core Opex Per MW  MAINTAINING HIGH LEVELS OF AVAILABILITY >97.5% Availability is the ratio between the energy actually generated and the energy that would have been generated without any downtime due to internal reasons, namely due to preventive maintenance or repairs. Therefore it is a clear indicator of performance of the company’s O&M practices as it focuses on reducing to a minimum any malfunctions and performing maintenance activities in the shortest possible timeframe. The company always maintained high levels of availability and has registered availability of above 97.5% in 2016, in line with its 2016-20 Business Plan target. EDPR will continue to improve availability through new predictive maintenance optimization measures supported by the 24/7 control and dispatch centre, in reducing damages most common during extreme weather and improving the scheduling of planned stops. Also a new spare parts warehousing strategy will be key in reducing downtime during unexpected repairs.  LEVERAGING QUALITY GROWTH ON DISTINCTIVE WIND ASSESSMENT TOWARD 33% LOAD FACTOR Load factor (or net capacity factor) is a measure of the quality of the renewable resource that reflects the percentage of maximum theoretical energy output with an equipment working at full capacity, in a given period. Ensuring the assets generate the maximum amount of energy possible is a key success factor. With regards to the operating portfolio, optimizing load factor is linked to improving availability as above described and, if possible, introducing productivity enhancement retrofits that boost production by setting older equipment models with the most up-to-date technological improvements available to increase efficiency in the utilization of renewable resources available. With regards to wind farms and solar plants under development, maximizing load factor is mostly the expert work of energy assessment and engineering teams, which implies designing an optimal layout of the plant by fitting the positioning and choice among different equipment models with the characteristics of the site, specially the terrain, from the collected resource measurements and their estimated energy outputs. The company has consistently maintained levels of load factor in the range of 29-30%, having registered 30% in 2016, which is slightly below the P50 (mean probability) assessment for the current fleet, given the lower wind resource in the period when compared with an average year. For 2020 EDPR has a target to reach 33% load factor, mainly on the back of the increase competitiveness of new capacity additions. 1  Supplies and Services + Personnel Costs  55  55   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  INCREASING EFFICIENCY, REDUCING CORE OPEX/MW -1% In addition to all company initiatives to boost production, EDPR also focuses on strict cost control efforts to improve efficiency and gain additional profitability. Leveraging on the experience accumulated over time, EDPR set a target in the 2016-20 Business Plan to reduce Core Opex/MW by -1% CAGR 2015-20. Core Opex refers the costs of Supplies & Service along with Personnel Costs, which are the ones controllable by the company. The target of reducing the manageable company costs structure, also benefits from the economies of scale of a growing company. With regards to O&M, representing c. 30% of total Opex, EDPR has already delivered results from the implementation of its M3 (Modular Maintenance Model) system and self-perform program to some of the wind farms that are no longer subject to initial warranty contracts.  M3 PROGRAM AND SELF-PERFORMANCE As EDPR’s fleet becomes more mature the initial O&M contracts signed with the turbine suppliers expire. When that happens the company needs to decide between renewing the maintenance service with the OEM2 or insourcing activities to operate the wind farm on its own, whilst maintaining high levels of availability. Based on EDPR’s expertise, under the M3 program O&M teams will decide on the optimal balance between external contractors and in-house maintenance. Usually, EDPR keeps control of high value-added activities such as maintenance planning, logistics and remote operations while outsourcing, under direct supervision, labor-intensive tasks. This new program immediately showed savings in operational expenses and increased control over quality. During 2016 selfperform maintenance was implemented in additional facilities whose maintenance contracts were up for renewal. The self-perform program is a step further in EDPR integration of maintenance tasks and activities, which is being implemented in the US, and consequently minimizing third-parties dependency. EDPR targets to increase the share of its fleet under the M3 and Self-Perform program up to c.50% by 2020, from c.30% levels in 2015.  Modular Maintenance Model (M3)  Lower Costs  Portfolio by O&M contract type  Segregate & insource main maintenance activities ISP1  OEM2 100%  90%-70%  EDPR  Full scope  Self-perform (SP)  M3 & Self perform  Insource more activities: preventative, logistics & small correctives EDPR 1  Full Scope  M3 & SP  2015  2020E  OEM2  ISP - Independent Service Provider;  2  OEM - Original Equipment Manufacturer  INCREASING PRODUCTION For the period 2016-20, and in line with its previous targets, EDPR aims to increase its total production by 10% CAGR 2015-20. This growth is to be supported by its distinctive competences and accretive projects. EDPR is also creating value by improving its assets by implementing new technologies on the turbines to boost the power output without requiring major component changes. Performance Analysis teams are collaborating with the manufacturers to determine the best practices to apply this new technology. For instance, installing new versions of the softwares on the older machines with the support of the manufacturer, improves the operation of the turbine and increases its efficiency. Another measure is the implementation of Vortex generators where some components are installed on the blades, modifying and improving the blades’ aerodynamics, achieving an increase in efficiency. By monitoring real-time conditions, the rotational speed of the generator can be increased while staying within the existing loads, thus increasing the power output and the wind farm revenues, without major investments. This technology has successfully being applied on many turbines and will keep being developed in the coming years. 2  Original Equipment Manufacturer  56 56   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  2.2.3. SELF-FUNDING MODEL EDPR self-funding model has been a cornerstone of EDPR’s strategy and its success has been crucial for funding growth. The self-funding model relies on a combination of the Retained Cash Flow from operating assets and EDPR’s successfully Asset Rotation strategy, along with the US Tax Equity structures to finance the profitable growth of the business. This model, that was already included in the previous business plan, substitutes the initial financing strategy that depended on corporate debt from EDP, the major shareholder of EDPR. Quality portfolio generating robust Retained Cash Flow  Retained Cash Flow (€ billion)  Rigorous investment plan set to deliver solid returns  2016-20  Cumulative for 2016-20  Capex and Financial Investments  €4.8 bn  Onshore + Solar PV Offshore  > 90% < 10%  New Asset Rotation (based on projects with PPAs)  up to €0.6 bn €120 m/year  Cumulative Asset Rotation  6.8  €1.1 bn  3.9  (including already signed in 2016)  EBITDA  Interest & TEI costs  Minorities Distributions  Taxes & Other  RCF  RETAINED CASH FLOW The primary source of funds for the company is the EBITDA generated from the existing assets, which after paying debt services costs, deduct capital distributions to equity partners and taxes is called Retained Cash Flow, meaning the amount available to pay dividends to EDPR shareholders and/or to fund new investments. A strong Retained Cash Flow generation of c.€3.9 billion is expected for the period 2016-20, which is cash available after taxes, interests and tax equity costs and distribution to minorities. EDPR indicated in May 2016, a dividend pay-out ratio policy in the range of 25-35% of its annual net profit, thus allowing most of the Retained Cash Flow to fund growth. The dividends paid in 2016 amounted to c.€44 million corresponding to the low end of the range relative.  ASSET ROTATION Proceeds from asset rotation transactions are also important sources of funds for the self-funding model of EDPR in financing its profitable growth. This enables the company to crystallize the value yet to be realized from the future cash-flows of its existing projects over their long remaining lifetime and reinvest the corresponding proceeds in the development of new value accretive projects, with superior returns. These transactions involve the company selling minority stakes (typically 49% stake) at project level while maintaining full management control over them. The scope of these transactions tend to be mature projects, generally already operating and thus significantly derisked, with high visibility of future cash-flows, that can be attractive to low risk institutional investors from whom EDPR can source a competitive cost of finance.  57  57   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  For the period 2016-20 EDPR has the target of completing €1.1 billion of Asset Rotation transaction, which as of December 2016 was already executed €550 million. The execution of those €550 million took place in April 2016, with EDPR entering into an agreement with Vortex, a fund led by EFG Hermes which includes investments from the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, to sell a 49% equity shareholding and outstanding shareholders loans in a portfolio of fully-owned wind onshore assets in Spain, Portugal, Belgium and France. The portfolio totalled 664 MW with 4-year average life, of which more than half located in Spain. This transaction was highly valued by the market due to the above market multiple at which EDPR was able to close the deal, €1.73 million/MW, a clear indicator of the quality of the company’s installed asset base that has attracted the interest of many institutional investors. For the completion of the Asset Rotation target, EDPR will continue to seek accretive projects with superior returns, thus crystallizing value and accelerating profitable growth.  US TAX EQUITY EDPR always aims to find external financing to its projects, namely through tax equity structures, typical of the US. The use of tax equity in the US enables an efficient utilization of the tax benefits provided by the project, otherwise unusable, therefore improving projects’ economics. In a simplistic view, tax equity investors contribute a sizable part of the initial project investment, receiving in return almost all of the PTCs granted to the project for first 10 years of operation along with the benefits from the accelerated depreciation. In 2016 EDPR signed two tax equity transactions, a total funding of $457 million comprising 429 MW, related to all projects that started operations in 2016. Tax Equity Transactions  2016  TIMBER ROAD III - Signed Dec. 16 Ohio  101 MW  $114 m  58  Texas & NY  328 MW Closing 4Q16  MUFG + State Street Corporation  58  HIDALGO & JERICHO RISE - Signed Sep. 16  $342 m Closing 4Q16  BofAML + Bank of NY Mellon   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  2.3. Risk Management In line with EDPR’s controlled risk profile, Risk Management process defines the mechanisms for evaluation and management of risks and opportunities impacting the business, increasing the likelihood of the company in achieving its financial targets, while minimizing fluctuations of results.  RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESS EDPR’s Enterprise Risk Management Process is an integrated and transversal management model that ensures the minimization of the effects of risk on EDPR's capital and earnings, as well as the implementation of best practices of Corporate Governance and transparency. The process aligns EDPR’s risk exposure with the company’s desired risk profile. Risk management policies are aimed to mitigate risks, without ignoring potential opportunities, thus, optimizing return versus risk exposure. The process is closely followed and supervised by the Audit and Control Committee, an independent supervisory body composed of non-executive members. Risk management is endorsed by the Executive Committee, supported by the Risk Committee and implemented in dayto-day decisions by all managers of the company. EDPR created three distinct meetings of the Risk Committee in order to help decision-making, separating discussions on execution of mitigation strategies, from those on the definition of new policies: •  RESTRICTED RISK COMMITTEE: Held every month, it is mainly focused on development risk and market risk from electricity price (market, basis, profile, GCs and RECs). It is the forum to discuss the evolution of projects under development and construction and the execution of mitigation strategies to reduce merchant exposure. It also monitors the limits of defined risk policies, with regards to counterparty risk, operational risk and country risk.  •  FINANCIAL RISK COMMITTEE: Held every quarter, it is held to review main financial risks and discuss the execution of mitigation strategies. Exchange rate risk, interest rate risk and credit risk from financial counterparties are most relevant risk reviewed in this committee.  •  RISK COMMITTEE: Held every quarter, it is the forum where new strategic analyses are discussed and new policies are proposed for approval to the Executive Committee. Additionally, EDPR’s overall risk position is reviewed, together with EBITDA@Risk and Net Income@Risk.  RISK MAP AT EDPR Risk Management at EDPR is focused on covering all risks of the company. In order to have a holistic view, they are classified in five Risk Categories.  59  59   ENERGY ENERGY THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  Market Risks  Risk Categories  It refers to the risk to EDPR resulting from movements in market prices. Due to the relationship between wind production and electricity price production risk is considered within market risk. In particular, market risks are changes in electricity prices, production risk, interest rates, foreign exchange  Strategic Risk  Business Risk  Operational Risk  Counterparty Risk  rates and other commodity prices.  Risk Groups  Electricity Price Risk  Inflation Risk  Interest Rate Risk  Liquidity Risk  Exchange Rate Risk  Commodity Price Risk  Electricity Production Risk  Risk that counterparty to a transaction could default before final settlement of the transaction’s cash flows. A direct economic loss would occur if transactions with the counterparty had positive economic value at the time of default. Even in the case of not defaulting, it may not comply with its contract obligations (timing, quality, etc.), implying additional higher costs due to its replacement or  Counterparty Credit Risk Counterparty Operational Risk  to delays in fulfilling the contract.  Development Risk  Legal Claims Risk (Compliance)  Execution Risk  Personnel Risk  Defined as the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external events (such as an increase in equipment default rates, increasing O&M, or natural disasters).  Operation Risk  (damage to Physical Assets and Equip. Performance)  Potential loss in the company's earnings due to adverse changes in business margins. Such losses can result, above all, from a serious increase in equipment prices or changes in the regulatory environment. Changes in electricity prices and wind production are considered market risks.  It refers to risks coming from macroeconomic, political, social or environmental situation in countries where EDPR is present, as well as those coming from a change in competitive landscape, from technology disruptions, from changes in energy markets or from governance decisions (investment decisions criteria, Corporate Governance and Reputational issues).  Processes Risk  Energy Production Risk  Information Technologies Risk  Wind Turbine Price Risk  Equipment PerformanceRisk  Wind Turbine Supply Risk  Regulatory Risk (renewables)  Country Risk  Invest. Decisions Criteria Risk  Corp. Organization and Governance  Competitive Landscape Risk  Reputational Risk  Energy Planning  Technology Disruptions Risk  Meteorological Changes  Within each Risk Category, risks are classified in Risk Groups. The full description of the risks and how they are managed can be found in the Corporate Governance chapter. The graph above summarizes the Risk Categories, the Risk Groups and the Risk Management mitigation strategies at EDPR.  60   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Mitigation Strategies  • Hedge of market exposure through long term power purchase agreements (PPA) or short-term financial hedges • Natural FX hedging, with debt and revenues in same currency • Execution of FX hedging for net investment (after deducting local debt) • Execution of FX hedging to eliminate FX transaction risk, mainly in Capex • Fixed interest rates • Alternative funding sources such as Tax equity structures and Multilateral/ Project Finance agreements  • Counterparty exposure limits by counterparty and at EDPR level • Collateral requirement if limits are exceeded • Monitoring of compliance with internal policy  • • • • • • • •  Supervision of suppliers by EDPR’s engineering team Flexible CODs in PPAs to avoid penalties Partnerships with strong local teams Monitor recurrent operational risks during construction and development Close Follow-up of O&M costs, turbine availability and failure rates Insurance against physical damage and business interruption Strict compliance with legal requirements and zero tolerance for unethical behavior or fraud  Attractive remuneration packages and training for personnel • Revision of all regulations that affects EDPR activity (environmental, taxes…) • Control of internal procedures • Redundancy of servers and control centres of wind farms  • Careful selection of energy markets based on country risk and energy market fundamentals • Diversification in markets and remuneration schemes • Active involvement in all major wind associations in all markets where EDPR is present • Signing of medium term agreements with turbine manufacturers to ensure visibility of turbine prices and supply • Relying on a large base of turbine suppliers to ensure supply  • • • •  Careful selection of countries Worst case profitability analysis of every new investment considering all risks factors Risk-return metrics at project and equity level  Consideration of stress case scenarios in the evolution of energy markets for new investment decisions • Follow-up of cost effectiveness of renewables technologies and potential market disruptions  During 2016, EDPR redefined the Enterprise Risk Management Framework for the company, framing all existing risk policies/procedures under each Risk Category: • • • •  Market Risk: Energy Price Hedging Policy, FTR participation procedure, US Active Scheduling Procedure. Counterparty Risk: Counterparty Risk Policy. Operational Risk: Operational Risk Policy. Strategic Risk: Country Risk Policy.  Additionally, in 2016 EDPR reassessed Operational Risk for the company, executing a bottom-up analysis across all departments, as stated in EDPR’s Operational Risk Policy. The new assessment replaces the one executed in 2014 and it will be used when evaluating Net Income@risk, the structural risk measure that considers all risk factors and is recurrently monitored by the Risk Committee.  61   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  EDPR RISK MATRIX BY RISK CATEGORY EDPR Risk Matrix is a qualitative assessment of likelihood and impact of the different risk categories within the company. It is dynamic and it depends on market conditions and future internal expectations. Change vs. Previous year  +  LIKELIHOOD  Comm. Price  Personnel  Interest Rate  FX  Execution/ Construction  Inflation  Elect. Production  Equip. market risk Counter -party  IT Operation (damages; equip. perf.)  Liquidity  Pipeline develop.  Regulatory  Strategic  Legal  Processes  Elect. Price  -  +  POTENTIAL FINANCIAL IMPACT  FOCUS ON ERM FRAMEWORK AT EDPR A corporation can manage risks in two different ways, one risk at a time on a largely and compartmentalized basis, or all risks together within a coordinated and strategic framework. The latter approach is called “Enterprise Risk Management” and is the approach used at EDPR. Enterprise risk management (ERM) is the process of planning, organizing, leading and controlling the activities of an organization in order to minimize the effects of risk on an organization's capital and earnings. Enterprise risk management expands the process to include not just risks associated with accidental losses, but also financial, strategic and other risks. Contents of an ERM Framework are defined similarly by different sources (Basel Committee, International Organization for Standardization and academic literature). In the case of EDPR, it was decided to follow Basel guidelines for ERM, adapted to the specificities of the renewable electricity generation business.  Risk Classification  Risk Assessment tools  Governance  Enterprise Risk Management Risk Appetite and Risk Migitation  Risk Reporting and Management Information Systems  62  Policies Review  Independent Review   3 Execution Economic Operational Performance Financial Performance  67 69  Stakeholders Employees Communities Suppliers Media  78 82 85 88  Safety First  89  Environment  90  Innovation  92   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  64   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  65   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  16  40   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  3 Execution  3.1. Economic 3.1.1. OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE Installed capacity increased 770 MW including 200 MW in a new country: Mexico. MW YE16 YE15  NC F Var.  GWh  YE16  YE15  Var.  YE16  YE15  Var.  Spain  2,194  2,194  -  26%  26%  +0pp  4,926  4,847  +2%  Portugal  1,251  1,247  +4  28%  27%  +1pp  3,047  1,991  +53%  Rest of Europe  1,541  1,523  +18  25%  27%  -2pp  3,257  3,225  +1%  388  364  +24  23%  26%  -3pp  777  785  -1%  71  71  21%  25%  -4pp  128  152  -16 % +23 %  France Belgium  -  Italy  144  100  +44  28%  28%  -0pp  258  210  Poland  418  468  -50  25%  28%  -3pp  951  951  -0 %  52  521  -  25%  26%  -1pp  1,143  1,127  +1%  Romania Europe  4,986  4,965  +22  26%  26%  -0pp  11,230  10,062  +12%  US  4,631  4,203  +429  33%  32%  +1pp  12,501  11,031  +13%  Canada  30  30  28%  27%  +1pp  75  72  +4 %  Mexico  200  +200  4,861  4,233  +629  33%  32%  +1pp  12,576  11,103  +13%  Brazil  204  84  +120  35%  30%  +4pp  666  222  +200%  EBITDA  10,052  9,281  +770  30%  29%  +0 p p  24,473  21,388  +14 %  356  356  North America  Other equity consolidated Spain  177  177  United States  179  179  10,408  9,637  EBITDA + Equity consol.  +770  EDPR continues to deliver solid selective growth  10.4 GW EBITDA + Net Equity  With a top quality portfolio, EDPR has a strong track record and proven capability to execute superior projects and deliver on targets. The installed asset base of 10.4 GW is not only young, on average 6 years, it is also mostly certified in terms of environmental and health and safety standards. Since 2008, EDPR has more than doubled its installed  SP  2% 48%  23%  capacity by adding 6 GW, resulting in a total installed capacity of 10,408 MW (EBITDA +  2016 installations concentrated in North America The largest growth in installed capacity occurred due to the completion of 629 MW in  RoE NA  Net Equity). As of year-end 2016, EDPR had installed 5,163 MW in Europe, 5,041 MW in North America and 204 MW in Brazil.  PT  12%  BR  15%  +770 MW in 2016  North America. This includes EDPR’s first 200 MW in Mexico. All of the MW had previously secured PPA contracts, thus providing long-term stability and visibility on the revenue  3%  stream.  16%  EU  In Europe 72 MW were installed, 44 MW in Italy, 24 MW in France and 4 MW in Portugal.  BR  The 22 net MW added in Europe includes the deconsolidation (in the 1Q16) of 50 MW,  NA  following the completion of the cross sale of two wind farms in Poland, by which EDPR sold its 60% share in a 50 MW wind farm and bought the remaining 35% share in a 54  82%  MW wind farm (already fully accounted as EBITDA MW). Finally, 2016 saw the completion of EDPR’s largest to date project in Brazil, Baixa do Feijão wind farm (120 MW).  67  67   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  14% Increase in YoY generation 21.4 TWh  24.5 TWh  1%  3%  23%  20%  9%  12%  15%  EDPR generated 24.5 TWh during 2016. When adding the over 2 TWh produced from our equity projects, enough clean energy to serve 53% of the electricity demand of Portugal.  13%  The 14% year-on-year increase in the electricity output benefited from the capacity additions over the last 12 months and ENEOP consolidation. EDPR achieved a 30% load factor during 2016 (vs 29% in 2015) reflecting the  52%  benefits of a balanced portfolio across different geographies.  51%  EDPR also achieved a stellar 98% availability. The company continues to leverage on its competitive advantages to maximize wind farm output and on its diversified  FY15 NA  portfolio to minimize the wind volatility risk.  FY16  RoE  PT  SP  BR  Assets' Average Age and Useful Life (years) Spain  Premium performance and diversified portfolio delivers balanced output EDPR’s operations in North America were the main driver for the electricity production growth in 2016, increasing by +13% YoY to 12.6 TWh and represented 51% of the total output. This performance was driven by EDPR’s unique ability to capture the wind resource available along with the contribution  9.2  from new additions. EDPR achieved a 33% load factor in North America, +1pp  Portugal  7.7  vs. 2015.  France  6.7  Production growth in Europe increased 12% vs 2015 to 11.2 TWh mainly  Belgium  7.0  Poland  increase in Spain and 1% in rest of Europe with lower wind resource being offset  4.3  Romania  supported by ENEOP consolidation (+1.0 TWh vs 2015) and by 2% output  4.7  by the higher installed capacity. EDPR achieved a 28% load factor in Portugal (+1pp) reflecting an above average wind resource. In the period, EDPR delivered a load factor of 26% in Spain, once  Italy 2.2 US Canada  again a solid premium over the Spanish market average load factor (+2pp).  6.0  The Rest of Europe operations delivered a 25% load factor (27% in 2015) and  3.1  posted higher year on year generation (+1%). Higher production in Italy (+49  Brazil 2.9 EDPR  GWh) and Romania (+16 GWh) was partially offset by weaker performances in Belgium (-24 GWh) and France (-8 GWh), with weaker wind resource offsetting  6.5 0  10  20  30  capacity additions. Poland remained stable year on year with the new capacity offsetting lower load factor.  248 MW of 2017 additions already under construction consolidating a young fleet in continuous growth By the end of 2016, EDPR had 248 MW under construction all related to projects to be delivered in 2017 with long term secured remuneration. In US, EDPR started the works of the 100 MW Meadow Lake V project in Indiana. In Brazil EDPR has 127 MW under construction related to the JAU&Aventura projects after successfully bidding in the A5 auction for 20 year PPAs. Finally in Europe, 21 MW were under construction, of which 18 MW in France and 3 MW in Portugal. As a result of continuous growth effort, EDPR also has a young portfolio with an average operating age of 7 years, with an estimate of over 18 years of useful life remaining to be captured. In Europe, EDPR’s portfolio had an average age of 7 years, in North America 6 years, and in Brazil 3 years.  68 68   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  3.1.2. FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE Revenues increased 7% YoY to 1.7 billion euros and EBITDA summed 1.2 billion euros In 2016, EDPR revenues totalled 1,651 million euros, an increase of 104 million euros when compared with 2015 mainly from capacity additions with an above portfolio average wind resource and with YoY comparison negatively impacted by an update, in 2015, of TEI’s post-flip residual interest accretion. Despite the lower than long-term average wind resource, EDPR’s output in the period increased 14%. The average selling price decreased by 5% mainly as a result of capacity additions mix (product vs price). Reported EBITDA increased 3% year on year to 1,171 million euros, with 29 million euros negative impact lower than average wind resource, leading to an EBITDA margin of 71%. If adjusted by non-recurring items, 2016 EBITDA increased 12% and EBITDA per MW in operation increased 1% to 128 thousand euros. Net Operating Costs totalled 480 million euros, with higher capacity in operation. Core opex (defined as Supplies and Services along with Personnel Costs) per average MW in operation decreased 5% YoY as a consequence of EDPR’s strict control over costs and O&M programs in place.  Financial Highlights (€m)  2016  2015  p% /€  Income Statement Revenues  1,651  1,547  +7%  EBITDA  1,171  1,142  +3%  56  167  (66%)  Operating Cash-Flow  869  701  +24%  Retained Cash-Flow  698  616  +13%  96  719  (87%)  Net Profit (attributable to EDPR equity holders)  C ash-Flow  Net investments  Balance Sheet Assets  16,734  15,736  +998  Equity  7,573  6,834  +739  Liabilities  9,161  8,902  +259  Liabilities Net Debt  2,755  3,707  (952)  Institutional Partnerships  1,520  1,165  +355  Net profit reached 56 million euros All in all, Net Profit totalled 56 million euros and Adjusted Net Profit 104 million euros, if adjusted for non-recurring events (one-offs: 2015 +59 million euros; 2016 -47 million euros).  Retained cash flow incresed 13% yoy to 698 million euros, capturing assets’ cash generation capabilities Despite the challenging year EDPR was able to deliver a robust cash-flow generation. Following EBITDA cash-generation, income tax of the period, interests, banking and derivatives expenses and minority dividends/interest payments, 2016 Retained Cash-Flow increased 13% to €698m. Capital expenditures (Capex) totalled 1,029 million euros reflecting the capacity added in the period, the capacity under construction and enhancements in capacity already in operation. Pursuing its asset ro ation strategy, in 2016, EDPR received proceeds of 1,189 million euros from the sale of non-controlling interests. On the back of its Asset Rotation strategy was completed the settlement of Axium transaction, signed in November 2015, EFG Hermes deal, signed in April 2016, and was completed the closing of European transactions with CTG, signed in December 2015. In the period, Net Debt totaled 2,755 million euros, lower YoY by 952 million euros. 6  69   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  INCOME STATEMENT Solid top line performance EDPR revenues increased 7% year on year to 1,651 million euros, despite the lower than long-term average wind resource and propelled by capacity additions with an above portfolio average wind resource and with YoY comparison negatively impacted by 2015 update of TEI´s post-flip residual interest accretion. Other operating income amounted 54 million euros, benefitting from a capital gain related to Polish wind farm cross-sale and with year on year comparison  Revenues Evolution ( m) 2 000  impacted by the gain subsequent to the control acquisition of certain assets of ENEOP (2015). Operating Costs (Opex) totalled 534 million euros, with  1 600  higher capacity in operation. In detail, Core Opex totalled 399 million euros, respectively,  reflecting  strict  control  over  costs  and  EDPR’s  asset  management strategy. Other operating costs decreased by 54 million euros to 135 million euros, mainly explained by lower write-offs in the period. In 2016, EBITDA increased 3% year on year to 1,171 million euros, leading  1 200 m  with Core Opex per Avg. MW and per MWh decreasing by 5% and 8%  1,547  1,651  1,277  800 400 0  to an EBITDA margin of 71%. If adjusted by one-offs, 2016 EBITDA  2014  2015  2016  increased 12% and EBITDA per MW in operation increased 1% to 128 thousand euros. Operating income (EBIT) decreased 2% YoY to 564 million euros, on the back of 8% increase in depreciation and amortization costs (including provisions, impairments and net of government grants), due to capacity additions. In 2016 EDPR’s provisions totalled 5 million euros related to Portuguese subsidies’ clawback from public development programs. At the financing level, Net Financial Expenses increased 23%. Net interest costs decreased 6%, benefitting from the lower cost of debt in the period after debt renegotiations with EDP and others. Institutional Partnership costs were 11 million euros higher year on year, reflecting mainly new tax equity deals, while capitalized expenses remained flat. Forex differences and derivatives had a positive impact of 10 million euros in the period. Other financial expenses increased by 77 million euros, including one-offs mainly from debt repayment/restructuring and 14 million euros from discontinue hedge accounting related to Spanish operations, while year on year comparison is also impacted by ENEOP consolidation in September 2015. Pre-Tax Profit increased to 214 million euros, with income taxes totaling 38 million euros. Non-controlling interests increased to 120 million euros mainly due to EDPR settlement of asset rotation and CTG deals. All in all, Net Profit totalled 56 million euros and Adjusted Net Profit 104 million euros if adjusted for non-recurring events. C onsolidated Income Statement (€m) Revenues Other operating Income Supplies and services Personnel costs  2016  2015  p %/€  1,6 51  1,54 7  +7%  54  162  (67%)  (305)  (293)  +4%  (94)  (84)  +11%  Other operating costs  (135)  (189)  (29%)  Operating Costs (net)  (480)  (405)  +19%  EBITDA  1,171  1,142  +3%  71%  74%  (3pp)  EBITDA/Net Revenues Provisions Depreciation and amortisation Amortization of government grants  (4.7)  0.2  -  (624)  (587)  + 6%  23  (3%)  EBIT  56 4  22  578  ( 2 %)  Financial Income / (expenses)  (350)  (285)  +23%  Share of profits of associates  (0.2)  (2)  (88%)  Pre-tax profit  214  291  (27%)  Income taxes  (38)  (45)  (17%)  176  245  (28%)  56  167  (66%)  120  79  +52%  Profit of the period Net Profit Equity holders of EDPR Non-controlling interest  70 70   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  BALANCE SHEET Total equity increases by 739 million euros Total Equity of 7.6 billion euros increased by 739 million euros in 2016, of which 585 million euros attributable to noncontrolling interests. The increased equity attributable to the shareholders of EDPR by 154 million euros is due to mainly the 56 million euros of Net Profit and 160 million euros of Asset Rotation transactions, reduced by the 44 million euros in dividend payments. Total liabilities increased 3% by +259 million euros, mainly in accounts payable (+488 million euros) and institutional partnerships (+355 million euros), offset by a reduction in financial debt (-814 million euros). With total liabilities of 9.2 billion euros, the debt-to-equity ratio of EDPR stood at 121% by the end of 2016, which is a decrease from the 130% in 2015. Liabilities were mainly composed of financial debt (37%), liabilities related to institutional partnerships in the US (17%) and accounts payable (30%). Liabilities to tax equity partnerships in the US stood at 1,520 million euros, and including +628 million dollars of new tax equity proceeds received in the 2016. Deferred revenues related to institutional partnerships primarily represent the non-economic liability associated to the tax credits already realized by the institutional investor, arising from accelerated tax depreciation, and yet to be recognized as income by EDPR throughout the remaining useful lifetime of the respective assets. Deferred tax liabilities reflect the liabilities arising from temporary differences between the accounting and the tax basis of assets and liabilities. Accounts payables include trade suppliers, PP&E suppliers, deferred income related to investment grants received and derivative financial instruments. As total assets totalled 16.7 billion euros in 2016, the equity ratio of EDPR reached 45%, versus 43% in 2015. Assets were 80% composed of net PP&E - property, plant and equipment, reflecting the cumulative net invested capital in renewable energy generation assets. Total net PP&E of 13.4 billion euros changed to reflect 1,156 million euros of new additions during the year and 256 million euros from forex translation (mainly as the result of a US Dollar appreciation), reduced by 620 million euros for depreciation charges, impairment losses and write-offs. Net intangible assets of 1.6 billion euros mainly include 1.4 billion euros from goodwill registered in the books, for the most part related to acquisitions in the US and Spain, while accounts receivable are mainly related to loans to related parties, trade receivables, guarantees and tax receivables.  Statement of Financial Position (€m) 2016  2015  p %/€  Property, plant and equipment, net  13,437  12,612  +825  Intangible assets and goodwill, net  1,596  1,534  +62  Assets  Financial investments, net  348  340  +8  76  47  +29  Inventories  24  23  +1  Accounts receivable – trade, net  266  222  +44  Accounts receivable – other, net  338  338  (0)  0  110  (110)  46  73  (27)  603  437  +166  16,734  15,736  +998  Cash and cash equivalents Assets held for sale Total Assets  2015  Share capital + share premium  4,914  4,914  -  Reserves and retained earnings  1,155  891  +264  Equity  Deferred tax assets  Collateral deposits  p%/€  2016  Net profit (equity holders of EDPR)  56  167  (110)  Non-controlling interests  1,448  863  +585  Total Equity  7,573  6,834  +739  Financial debt  3,406  4,220  (814)  Institutional partnerships  Liabilities 1,520  1,165  +355  Provisions  275  121  +154  Deferred tax liabilities  365  316  +49  Deferred revenues from institutional partnerships  819  791  +28  Accounts payable – net  2,776  2,288  +488  Total Liabilities  9,161  8,902  +259  16,734  15,736  +998  Total Equity and Liabilities  71  71   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  CASH FLOW STATEMENT Strong operating cash-flow In 2016, EDPR generated Operating Cash-Flow of 869 million euros, an increase of 24% year on year, reflecting EBITDA performance and reinforcing the generation capabilities of its assets in operation.  Operating Cash Flow Evolution (€m) 800  The key items that explain 2016 cash-flow evolution are the following: Operating Cash-Flow, which is the EBITDA net of income tax and adjusted by non-cash items (namely income from US institutional partnerships) and net of changes in working capital, increased 24% to 869 million euros. •  Capital expenditures with capacity additions, ongoing construction and development works totalled 1,029 million euros. Other net investing activities amounted 20 million euros, mostly reflecting EDPR investments in projects developed in partnership and equipment suppliers invoices already booked but not yet paid.  •  Pursuing its Asset Rotation strategy, in 2016 occurred the settlement of Axium transaction, EFG Hermes deal and the settlement of European transactions with CTG, for a combined amount of 1,189 million euros.  •  2014  600  701  2015  m  •  869 707  400 200 0 2016  Capex Breakdown by Platform 13%  5%  Proceeds from new institutional tax equity financing structure totalled 624 million euros, related to the 199 MW Waverly wind farm tax equity signed in the 4Q15 along with 2016 projects of 429 MW. Payments to institutional partnerships totalled 172 million euros contributing to the reduction of  82%  Institutional Partnership liability. Total net dividends and other capital distributions paid to minorities amounted to 146 million euros (including 44 million euros to EDPR shareholders). In the period, Forex & Other had a negative impact increasing Net Debt by 207 million euros. •  In terms of Retained Cash Flow, which captures the cash generated by  North America  Europe  Brazil  operations to re-invest, distribute dividends and amortize debt, it increased 13% to 698 million euros. In December 2016, Net Debt & Institutional Partnership Liability decreased by 597 million euros.  C ash Flow (€m) EBITDA Current Income Tax Net interest costs Share of profits of associates  2016  2015  p %/€  1,171  1,142  +3%  (50)  (51)  (3%)  (179)  (188)  (5%)  (0.2)  (2)  (88%)  FFO (Funds from operations)  942  901  +5%  Net interest costs  179  188  (5%)  0.2  2  (88%)  Non-cash items adjustments  Income from associated companies  (209)  (263)  (20%)  Changes in working capital  (43)  (127)  (66%)  Op er at ing C ash F l o w  869  701  +2 4 %  (1,029)  (903)  +14%  (31)  (157)  (80%)  Changes in working capital related to PP&E suppliers  10  26  (61%)  Government Grants  0.8  1.5  (44%)  Net Operating Cash Flow  (181)  (330)  (45%)  Sale of non-controlling interests and shareholders' loans  1,189  395  -  452  68  -  Capex Financial Investments  Proceeds/(Payments) related to Institutional partnerships Net interest costs (post capitalisation)  (156)  (165)  (6%)  Dividends net and other capital distributions  (146)  (115)  +26%  Forex & Other  (207)  (277)  (25%)  952  (425)  (324%)  Decrease / (Increase) in Net Debt  72 72   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  FINANCIAL DEBT Long-term and stable debt profile EDPR’s total Financial Debt decreased by 952 million euros to 2.8 billion euros, reflecting the settlement of Asset Rotation transactions, the cash flow generated by the assets and the investments done in the period.  Debt Interest Rate type profile  Loans with EDP group, EDPR’s principal shareholder, accounted for 77% of the  10%  debt, while loans with financial institutions represented 23%. To continue to diversify its funding sources EDPR keeps on executing top quality projects enabling the company to secure local project finance at competitive costs. In 2016, EDPR signed a project finance transaction for its first wind farm  90%  in Mexico. The long-term contracted debt facility amounts to 278 million US Dollars. As of December 2016, 49% of EDPR's financial debt was Euro denominated, 41% was funded in US Dollars, related to the company's investment in the US,  Fixed  Variable  and the remaining 10% was mostly related with debt in Polish Zloty and Brazilian Real. EDPR continues to follow a long-term fixed rate funding strategy, matching the operating cash-flow profile with its financial costs and therefore mitigating  Debt Maturity Profile (%) 70%  debt had a fixed interest rate and only 3% had maturity schedule for 2017. In  60%  December 2016, 54% of EDPR’s financial debt had maturity in 2018 (reflecting  50%  a set of 10-year loans granted by EDP in 2008), 13% in 2019 and 30% in 2020  40%  %  interest rate risk. Accordingly, as of December 2016, 90% of EDPR’s financial  and beyond. As of December 2016 the average interest rate was 4.0%, lower versus December 2015, reflecting debt restructuring and early debt amortized in the period. In December 2016, EDPR early amortized 364 million US Dollars with maturity scheduled for 2018/19, which was contracted in 2009 with EDP.  54%  30% 20% 10%  13%  17%  13%  3%  0% 2016/7 2018  2019  2020  2021  Institutional partnerships Liabilities referred to Institutional Partnerships increased to 1,520 million euros  Cost of Debt (%)  from 1,165 million euros in 2015, reflecting the benefits captured by the tax equity partners during the period and the establishment of a new institutional  4.3%  Tax Equity financing structure.  2016  2015  p€  3,406  4,220  -814  46  73  -27  Total Financial Debt  3,360  4,147  -787  Cash and Equivalents  603  437  +166  Loans to EDP Group related companies and cash pooling  1  3  -1  Financial assets held for trading  0  0  0  605  439  +165  2,755  3,707  4.0%  -952  Financial Debt (€m) Nominal Financial Debt + Accrued interests Collateral deposits associated with Debt  Cash & Equivalents Net Debt  2015  2016  73  73   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  EUROPE Revenues In Europe, EDPR delivered revenues of 913 million euros, an increase of 81  Revenues Evolution ( m)  million euros versus 2015, reflecting the impact from higher electricity output that increased 12% versus 2015 to 11.2 TWh, and despite lower  800  average selling price. European output benefited from capacity additions generation accounted for 46% of EDPR total output.  832 747  600 m  over the period along with a stable 26% load factor. In 2016, European  913  1 000  400  In detail, the increase in revenues was mainly the result of higher revenues  200  in Portugal, with an increase of 78 million euros versus 2015 propelled by ENEOP consolidation.  0 2014  Average selling price In the period, EDPR average selling price in Europe decreased 2% to 81  100,0  Portugal, due to a different mix of wind farms in operation following the  83.0  81.5  2015  2016  80,0 /MWh  consolidation of 613 MW from ENEOP in September 2015, and the 15% lower evolution and forex translation.  2016  Average Selling Price ( /MWh)  euros per MWh, mainly driven by a 7% lower average selling price in  average selling price in Poland on the back of green certificates price  2015  60,0 40,0 20,0  Net operating costs  0,0  Net Operating costs increased 106 million euros, to 247 million euros, mainly  explained by the decreased in Other operating income impacted by a capital gain subsequent to the sale of EDPR 60% share in a 50 MW wind farm in Poland and with year on year comparison affected by the gain subsequent to the control acquisition of certain assets of ENEOP accounted in 2015. Supplies and Services and Personnel costs increased year on year on the back of higher capacity in operation and Other operating costs decreased 15 million euros, reflecting EDPR´s strict control over costs. In 2016, Supplies & Services and Personnel Costs per average MW in operation decreased 3% year on year to 39 thousand euros, supported by EDPR’s asset management strategy and higher capacity in operation. Supplies & Services and Personnel Costs per MWh decreased 3% year on year to 17.1 euros benefited from the higher output in the period. All in all, EBITDA in Europe totalled 666 million euros, leading to an EBITDA margin of 73%, while EBIT reached 360 million euros. In the period, impairments and provisions for contingencies amounted to 9 million euros.  Europe Income Statement (€m) Revenues Other operating income Supplies and services Personnel costs Other operating costs Operating Costs (net)  EBITDA EBITDA/Net Revenues Provisions Depreciation and amortisation Amortization of government grants  EBIT  74 74  2016  2015  p %/€  913  832  +10%  35  140  (75%)  (162)  (151)  +7%  (30)  (27)  +14%  (89)  (104)  (15%)  (247)  (141)  +74%  666  690  (3%)  73%  83%  (10pp)  (5)  (0)  -  (303)  (291)  +4%  1  2  (36%)  360  401  (10%)   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  NORTH AMERICA Revenues  Revenues Evolution ($m)  In 2016, Revenues increased 1% to 781 million US Dollars, on the back of  1000  the 13% increase in electricity output, offsetting the lower average selling price in the period.  772  800  781  2015  2016  672  $m  600  Average selling price  400  Average selling price in the region decreased 9% versus 2015, at $46 per 200  MWh. In the US wholesale prices plus hedges were stable year on year but average realized merchant price was negatively impacted by a 200 MW PPA  0  expiration in the first quarter of 2016 and with 2015 benefiting from the  2014  sale of 2014 REC stock. In Canada, the average selling price was $109 per MWh, 3% lower than previous year in US Dollars, penalized by forex translation  US installed capacity by tax incentive  (stable versus 2015 in local currency).  Net operating costs Net Operating costs summed 225 million US Dollars, 34 million US Dollars  22%  lower than in 2015, mainly explained by the decrease in Other operating costs, with year on year comparison affected by the 46 million US Dollars write-offs recognized in 2015. Personnel costs and Supplies and Services, justified by the higher capacity in operation and the Operational and Maintenance strategy,  11%  67%  increased 9 million US Dollars. Supplies and Services and Personnel costs per average MW in operation decreased by 4% versus 2015 to 48 thousand US Dollars, reflecting EDPR focus on efficiency and control over costs along with an increase in average MW in operation. Core Opex per MWh decreased by 7% to $16, also benefitting by the higher wind resource in the period.  PTC/ITC (Tax Equity) Cash Grant Flip (Tax Equity) Cash Grant  Institutional partnerships and government grants Income from institutional partnerships stood stable at 219 million US Dollars, reflecting new tax equity partnerships, the output of the projects generating PTCs and with year on year comparison impacted by 2015 one-off event (33 million Dollars), from an update of tax equity investors’ post-flip residual interest accretion.  2016  2015  p %/US$  Electricity Sales & Other  562  553  +2%  Income from Institutional Partnerships  219  219  (0%)  781  772  +1%  26  22  +18%  (154)  (149)  North America Income Statement (US$m)  Revenues Other operating income Supplies and services  +4%  In 2016, EDPR received 308 million US Dollars as part of an asset rotation transaction signed in 2015. It also received 238 million US Dollars  from  partnership  an  structure  institutional signed  in  October 2015. In addition, EDPR  Personnel costs  (49)  (45)  +9%  Other operating costs  (48)  (88)  (45%)  (225)  (259)  (13%)  555  513  +8%  the 78 MW Jericho Rise and in the  71%  66%  +5pp  101 MW Amazon Wind Farm US  0  0  (53%)  (343)  (320)  +7%  23  23  -  235  216  Operating Costs (net)  EBITDA EBITDA/Net Revenues Provisions Depreciation and amortisation Amortization of government grants  EBIT  +9%  completed 457 million US Dollars of tax equity financing in exchange for an interest in the 250 MW Hidalgo,  Central project (Timber Road III). All in all, EBITDA went up 8% to 555 million  US  Dollars,  leading  the  EBITDA margin to increase to 71%.  75  75   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  BRAZIL Revenues In Brazil, EDPR reached revenues of 133 million reais, representing a year on  Revenues Evolution ($Rm)  year increase of 68%, explained by an increased in electricity generation on the back of higher generation capacity and a stronger load factor.  133  140 120 100 $Rm  The average selling price in Brazil decreased 42% to R$216 per MWh,  78  79  2014  Average selling price  2015  80 60  reflecting mainly the different mix of a new wind farm in operation (production  40  versus price).  20 0  In December 2016, EDPR had 204 MW of wind-installed capacity in Brazil, of which 84 MW under incentive programs for renewable energy development  2016  (PROINFA) and 120 MW awarded according with an auction system. Under these programs the projects were awarded with long-term contracts to sell  Average Selling Price ($R/MWh)  the electricity produced for 20 years, providing long-term visibility over cashflow generation throughout the projects’ life.  400  Net operating costs  370  300 $R/MWh  Net Operating costs totalled 36 million reais, an increase of 2 million reais versus 2015 mainly due to lower Other operating costs, that decreased 42% reflecting EDPR´s strict control over costs and increased efficiency, and to Core Opex, that totalled 36 million reais impacted by the higher capacity in  216 200  100  operation. Core Opex per average MW and per MWh decreased year on year by 25% and 54% respectively.  0 2015  Following the outstanding top line performance, in 2016, EBITDA reached 97 million reais, an increase of 113% versus previous year, leading to a 15pp increased of the EBITDA margin.  Brazil Income Statement (R$m) Revenues Other operating income Supplies and services  2016  2015  p%/R$  133  79  +68%  6  2  -  (28)  (21)  +38%  Personnel costs  (8)  (6)  +38%  Other operating costs  (6)  (10)  (42%)  (36)  (34)  +7%  Operating Costs (net)  EBITDA EBITDA/Net Revenues Provisions Depreciation and amortisation Amortization of government grants  EBIT  76 76  97  45  +113%  73%  58%  0  0  +15pp -  (31)  (19)  +65%  0  0  +80%  66  27  +147%  2016   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Other reporting topics  RELEVANT AND SUBSEQUENT EVENTS The following are the most relevant events from 2016 that have an impact in 2017 and subsequent events from the first months of 2017 until the publication of this report.    EDPR announces the sale of a minority stake in Portuguese assets to CTG    Ordinances 268-B/2016 and 69/2017    EDPR awarded long term contracts for 127 MW at the Italian wind auction    EDPR concludes the sale of minority stakes in Poland and Italy    EDPR established new institutional partnership structure for 328 MW and 101 MW in the US    EDPR secures PPA for new 200 MW and 75 MW wind farms in the United States    EDPR closed an asset rotation transaction in Europe, for a total consideration of €550 million  For additional information on these events, please refer to Note 39 of EDPR Consolidated Annual Accounts.  INFORMATION ON AVERAGE PAYMENT TERMS TO SUPPLIERS In 2016 total payments made from Spanish companies to suppliers, amounted to €123,520 thousand with a weighted average payment period of 52 days, below the payment period stipulated by law of 60 days.  77  77   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  3.2. Stakeholders 3.2.1. EMPLOYEES EDPR's growth in recent years has created a new labor environment that is home to three different generations, a landscape in which it is vital for the company to be able to adapt to the changing business realities in the markets where we operate. We offer a customized employee value proposition based on development, transparency and flexibility, which allows us to attract and retain talent, as well as ensure the ongoing growth and development of our employees in order to have team-oriented people capable of adjusting to the ever-changing working environment. At EDPR: •  We foster the talent of our people.  •  We are sustainable and efficient.  •  We are committed to excellence and innovation. In EDPR, we are...  1,083 employees  57%  98%  Millenials  33%  Women  Permanent Employees  33 Nationalities  This commitment and execution was recognized by Great Place to Work as EDPR was once again been ranked among the 50 best companies to work in 2016 in Spain and Poland. We are sure that a motivated workforce aligned with the company’s strategy is one of the key drivers behind our ability to deliver on results.  DEVELOPMENT EDPR is committed to the development of its employees, offering them an attractive professional career and aligning their capabilities and skills with the current and future needs of the company. The growth and development of the Group's business has led EDPR to invest in people with potential, who can contribute to the creation of value. Our objective is to attract talented people and to create opportunities for current employees through mobility and development actions in order to boost the potential of our employees. The HR strategy supports different initiatives to give them visibility and foster their professional development inside the company. Vacant positions are advertised internally and as a consequence, 100% of new Directors have been hired internally in 2016. The cornerstones of development at EDPR are as follows: •  78  Training and Development Programs  •  78  Mobility  •  Renewable Energy School   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  MOBILITY EDPR considers mobility, both functional and geographical, as a human resources management tool that contributes to the organizational development. It is considered internally as a way of stimulating employees’ motivation, skills, productivity and personal fulfilment. The mobility processes within EDPR aim to respond to the different challenges and needs of the Group, taking into account the particular characteristics of the different geographies.  2016 Internal Mobility •  Functional: 59  •  Geographical: 5  •  Functional & Geographical: 11  TRAINING AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS The development of our employees is a strategic target for EDPR. That is why we offer job-specific ongoing training opportunities to contribute towards enhancing knowledge and skills, as well as specific development programs aligned with the company's strategy. In this regard, in order to support the company’s growth, aligning current and future organizational demands with employees’ capabilities, as well as to enhance their professional development, EDPR has designed development programs for middle management, with the goal of providing them with the proper tools to take on new responsibilities.  During 2016, EDPR carried out the following Programs: LEAD NOW PROGRAM: an advanced program aimed at EDPR middle management to support them in their new roles. During the program, participants have the opportunity to self-assess their management style, go further into the skills needed to develop an efficient management approach and learn their new role in what regards the HR processes within their teams. EXECUTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM: an advanced development program carried out in collaboration with a leading Business School designed to enhance the management and leadership skills of top-performing employees from across the business. Participants learn to take management decisions in a fast-paced and competitive environment, among other aspects. During the program, participants learn in-depth knowledge about our core business areas, working in teams on a practical EDPR Business Case to analyze new strategic opportunities for the company. This translates into the creation of several proposals capable of being implemented once the program is concluded. COACHING PROGRAM: program aimed at middle management, who receive coaching sessions delivered by company executives. The coaches are given the opportunity to detect their strong points and identify areas for improvement as a way to fine-tune their skills, always with the support of a guide who is always present at these sessions.  In addition to these specific development programs, each year, a customized Training Plan is created for all our employees based on the results of a skills assessment between manager and the subordinate to define the specific training needs of each employee. These steps allow us to align the organization’s current and futures needs with our employees' skill sets and expertise. In 2016, we delivered a total of 44,350 training hours, equivalent to 41 hours of training per employee. 100% of employees received training in 2016.  79  79   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  RENEWABLE ENERGY SCHOOL To achieve our training and new employees’ integration strategy, the Renewable Energy School plays a fundamental role. Established in 2011 within the framework of the Corporate EDP University, the Energy School aims to promote the development of individuals, facilitate learning and share knowledge generated within the Group as well as to acquire the skills needed to ensure the sustainability of EDPR's businesses across all the markets where the company is present. The objective of the School goes beyond mere training since it emerged also as a platform for sharing knowledge, expertise and best practices across the company. During 2016, 39 training sessions were delivered in Europe, the United States and Brazil, representing a total of 8,398 training hours and 1,027 attendances. A total of 735 employees took part in the School's courses, equivalent to 68% of the total headcount. The School engaged 116 experts within the organization to deliver the training sessions, 40% of whom were directors and heads of departments, which helped the transfer of knowledge to employees.  TRANSPARENCY ATTRACTING TALENT At EDPR, we strive to attract and retain professionals who seek to excel in their work in order to position the company as the "the first choice for employees" in the labor market. In this sense, EDPR launches initiatives on an ongoing basis to strengthen its image as a leading employer by participating at numerous job fairs and visiting prestigious universities and business schools. EDPR invests in the development of young people to help them becoming excellent professionals within the EDPR Group. To this end, EDPR offers an internship program in order to provide young professionals with work experience and to identify future employees who can contribute to the future development of the business. During 2016, EDPR offered 65 long-term internships and 30 summer internships, of which 12% translated into new hires. Moreover, in 2016 EDPR hired 158 employees, 31% of whom were women. Non-discrimination and equal opportunities are enshrined in our selection processes. This is reflected in the Code of Ethics, which contains specific clauses on non-discrimination and equal opportunities, in line with the company’s culture of diversity.  INTEGRATION Among our initiatives to integrate new staff we include our Welcome Day, a three-day event for new hires, which allows them to gain basic knowledge about the company and our business. Depending on the employee’s profile, we offer them a visit to one of the wind farms or the remote dispatch center.  PERSONAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS The EDP Group uses a 70.20.10 development model in which not only the theoretical training but also initiatives related to on-the-job experience and teamwork are crucial for the development. The Personal Development Plans are a very effective tool that enable us to structure training Visit to a Wind Farm on EDPR actions for the candidate aimed at widening their abilities and expertise since it requires a Welcome Day reflection upon the results of their skills assessement and identify the individual's strong points and areas where he can improve, taking into account the employee's development level, as well as the teamwork and organizational strategy.  80  80   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  The Personal Development Plans (PDIs) launched in 2015 were reviewed in 2016, testament to our culture of continuous feedback and ongoing improvement. These are voluntary plans, agreed between manager and employee.  FLEXIBILITY As part of our value proposition at EDPR, we offer a competitive remuneration package, aligned with the best practices in the market. The general remuneration policy incorporates particular features of each geography and is sufficiently flexible so that it can be adapted to the specific needs of each region. The fixed remuneration is supplemented by a variable bonus that depends on an evaluation that measures individual, area and company KPIs. In addition, we understand the importance of maintaining a work-life balance. This has led to an increase in employee’s satisfaction while bolstering productivity and morale. At EDPR, the Work-Life Balance (WLB) is not just aimed at employees with children, it is a set of initiatives to promote a positive working environment in which employees can advance in their professional career and give their best. We believe that WLB must be a shared responsibility. We seek to constantly improve our WLB measures and provide the most suitable benefits to employees. In fact, we often design WLB benefits that are tailored to the countries where EDPR operates. EDPR’s WLB practices have been awarded for five years now the Responsible Family Employer Certification (EFR Empresa Familiarmente Responsable) by Spain's MásFamilia Foundation. In this regard, EDPR has been promoted into the “Proactive Company” category, which reflects our commitment to promoting a healthy work-life balance for our employees.  CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2016 A hallmark of EDPR is its ongoing commitment to seek new initiatives, programs and measures to make our company a great place to work. This commitment to improve our HR management, making sure that employees consider the company a challenging place, where they are willing to give their best by combining high standards of excellence with efficiency, a company in which listening to employees' helps us stand out from the competition, in short, making EDPR a special place to work. In November 2015, EDP launched a new edition of its Climate Survey, which constituted another communication channel to learn the opinions and viewpoints of our employees. Participation rates were very high as 93% of EDPR employees have taken part in the survey, making the results representative of the general climate, as well as providing insight on an individual level. The results reflect high overall levels of commitment (72%), in line with those of EDP (75%) and other leading companies employing the best practices in this area (73%). Of particular note, the most highly valued aspects by employees include job stability, working conditions and working environment. However, closer examination reveals improvement opportunities in certain areas, which today represent the foundations of our Climate Action Plan 2016, which comprises 13 specific actions. These measures have been conveyed to all employees via various platforms.  81  81   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  3.2.2. COMMUNITIES Tax reporting It is an ethical and civic duty to contribute  to  the  financing  of  the  general functions of the States where the  Group  is  present  through  the  payment of taxes and contributions due in  accordance  with  the  applicable  Constitution and remaining  laws of  those States, contributing to the welfare of  citizens,  development  to of  a  the  EDPR provides long-lasting economic benefits to surrounding areas throughout the entire lifecycle of its wind farms. These benefits include, but are not limited to, infrastructure investments, tax payments, landowners’ royalty payments, job creation and direct contributions to community projects.  sustainable Group’s  local  INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTS  businesses and to the value creation for  ROADS  shareholders. The total tax contribution  The construction of a wind farm comprises the construction of new roads  of EDPR Group to the public finances amounts  to  Moreover,  €142m EDPR’s  in  year  Social  2016.  Security  contribution amounts to €12m.  and the rehabilitation of existing ones in order to transport heavy equipment (i.e. wind turbines) to the site during construction works. The local communities benefit from these roads, as they provide an improved connection for local inhabitants to perform their agricultural activities. In 2016, we invested 4.7 million Euros to develop community roads.  Distribution of EDPR Group's tax payments by country  UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURES The integration of our generation capacity may require upgrades in the  14% 1%  distribution and transmission grids that belong to the distribution system 20%  or transmission system operators. Most of the times, these upgrades are €142m in 2016  financially and technically supported by EDPR, indirectly benefitting the  36%  quality of electric service in the surrounding areas. This is particularly important in countries where wind energy is in its early stages. In 2016, we invested 11.4 million Euros to improve public electric facilities.  29%  Spain  Portugal  US + Canada  Rest of Europe  Brazil  LEASES, TAXES, AND REVENUE SHARING EDPR also provides direct economic returns to the local and regional  Distribution of EDPR Group's tax payments by tax type  communities by means of land leases, local taxes and property taxes. For example, in the US, property tax is paid to state and local entities in the states where the assets are held, which benefits the local communities. This revenue sharing is a large contribution to the yearly budget of rural  9%  municipalities where wind farms are located. Furthermore, during the construction of our wind farms, the local community can see an influx of  32% €142m in 2016  29%  30% Corporate Income Tax Property & Land Taxes  temporary construction workers that provide a positive impact on the local economy through local spending and increased sales tax revenue.  HIDALGO WINDFARM Energy Tax Other Tributes  Hidalgo Wind Farm contributes with significant economic benefits to the surrounding community in the form of payments to land owners, local spending and annual community investment. Along with the recurring payments to over 70 landowners within the 33,000-acre project, Hidalgo also brings approximately US$200 million in taxable assets to the counties in which the project was built. The construction of the project brought  82 82   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  more than 400 workers to the rural south Texas town of McCook and the continued operations of the project will ensure that a number of long-term jobs will remain in the community for the life of the project. Along with the economic benefit to the county and community, there is a significant environmental benefit as well. Now that the project is up and running it will be providing enough energy to power approximately 55,000 average Texan homes every year.  LOCAL HIRING AND PROCUREMENT PRACTICES Although there are no in-house procedures explicitly requiring local recruitment, a high percentage of our employees and 99% of the purchases come from the locations in which the company operates. As a result, we contribute to the local economic development. For operational activities, we usually hire members of the local community for the operation and maintenance services of the wind farms, such as wind farm management, wind turbines operation and maintenance, electrical and civil works maintenance, environmental surveillance and other support services. These practices let us benefit from local workers specific knowledge.  COMMUNITY PROJECTS EDPR voluntarily promotes and supports social, cultural, environmental and educational initiatives with the purpose of contributing to the sustainable development of its business and in order to uphold its strategic vision. The goal is to make a positive impact on the communities where we operate, and to maintain and enhance our reputation as a responsible company working for the common good. EDPR plans for the results it intends to achieve, and evaluates projects in which is involved in, according to international standards for corporate social investments (London Benchmarking Group). EDPR in 2016: •  1.1 million euros invested  •  More than 150 initiatives with the community  EDP FOUNDATION IN SPAIN The mission of the EDP Foundation is to strengthen the commitment of the EDP Group in the geographical spheres in which the group operates, with special emphasis on environmental, social, cultural and educational areas within a perspective of global sustainable development, where the efficient and responsible use and generation of energy plays a decisive role. In 2016, the EDP Foundation in Spain supported a series of initiatives financed by EDPR. Energía Solidaria The Energía Solidaria program aims to increase the safety, well-being and energy efficiency of the most disadvantaged families. With the collaboration of Caritas and through different actions of energy improvement, in 2016 the number of direct beneficiaries has been 431 and 104 indirect beneficiaries. The program has included several actions focused to cover the energy needs of families and Caritas centers (technical centers, welfare flat and rehabilitation centers). For example, energy audits were carried out in 10 families identified by Caritas, as well as the implementation of the recommended measures.  83  83   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  ROMANIA: CLOSER2YOU We are investing in relationships and the development of communities located near our operations, as well as in the legacy we want to leave for future generations. For that reason we have created the Closer2You initiative, whose first edition was held in Constanta County, Romania. In order to help a family with three children living in poor conditions with no electricity, no water supply and without incomes for the parents due to the inability to work, this initiative addressed thermal rehabilitation of the house, replacing windows, doors and water supply. Collaboration agreements were reached with local authorities and suppliers in order to provide the family with water and more dignified conditions. The home was remodeled, making it safer and improving the family’s level of comfort. The initiative works as a way of enriching our relationship with stakeholders and is focused on developing sustainable communities. In 2017, Closer2You will reach other countries around the world, such as Brazil, Spain, Portugal and Poland.  Before and after rehabilitation  EUROPE: GENERATION EDPR Generation EDPR is a set of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) initiatives implemented by the company, namely Your Energy, University Challenge, Windexperts and Green Education. University Challenge aims to foster the spirit of innovation and creativity within the academic community, which in turn will promote a greater bond between universities and the business world. The program reached two important milestones in 2016: in its eighth edition in Spain, one of the winning groups created a business with the objective of implementing their project (use of drones for maintenance operations in wind farms); also, the program became international with its first Polish edition. Your Energy is an international program that helps children discovering the world of renewable energies and Green Education supports the education of children and teenagers of families with limited resources.  YOUR ENERGY 4,700 students in Spain, Italy and Poland UNIVERSITY CHALLENGE 44 universities in Spain and Poland GREEN EDUCATION 119 students in Spain and Portugal  Because we believe there is no better way to add value to society than to support these types of projects, we will continue to invest fostering creativity and knowledge among young people. Know more in generationedpr.edpr.com  WIND EXPERTS IN SPAIN Wind Experts is a competition launched only in 2016 intended to educate children from 10 to 13 years about renewable energies while developing their creativity. Through a partnership with the Portuguese toy company, Science4you, nine schools responded to the challenge and more than 60 children received a model wind turbine, which they had to use to create a new structure using only recyclable materials. The goal for the future is to expand the number of schools participating in the initiative and make it international.  UNITED STATES: EMPLOYEES DONATE BOOKS TO DESERVING ORGANIZATIONS EDPR North America supports the local community with many initiatives. One of them was a book drive coordinated by EDPR NA Volunteer Committee, which asked employees to donate new and gently used books to be given to three local organizations: the Texas Children’s Hospital, Reading Aces and the Houston Center for Literacy. A total of 416 books were donated. Of those, 46 new books went to the Texas Children’s Hospital, 204 gently-used children’s books went to Reading Aces, and 166 gently-used books went to the Houston Center for Literacy. In Spain, EDPR we held a similar initiative and 307 books were donated by employees.  84 84   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  3.2.3. SUPPLIERS EDPR’s value creation capacity, leadership in its business areas and relationship with its stakeholders is significantly influenced by the performance of its suppliers. EDPR bases its relationship with suppliers on trust, collaboration and creation of shared value. This results in a joint capacity to innovate, strengthen sustainability policy and improve quality of operations. EDPR SUPPLY CHAIN During 2016 an extensive characterization study of EDPR’s purchases was developed, aiming a deeper knowledge about the economic, social and environmental impacts of EDPR’s supply chain. EDPR expects from now on to use these results for better definition of the priorities concerning sustainability management. A supplier is considered critical through an added critical awareness score that accounts multiple criteria: annual value spend; supply frequency; access to customers; access to technical equipment or sensitive data; supplier substitutability; component substitutability; supply failure consequence; supplier segmentation; safety risks and environmental risks. and obligations, e.g. through supply or service failure consequences, are the concerns of the identification process. From the point of view of criticality for the business, EDPR’s suppliers segments are: • Critical suppliers: Turbines, BOP (Balance of Plant) and O&M (Operation and Maintenance), and; •  Non-critical suppliers: indirect purchases.  A new Sustainable Procurement Policy was defined and improvements were introduced in the suppliers’ management process. EDPR is reinforcing out audit procedures and will implement a significantly higher number of audits to suppliers.  Over  5,060  (1)  suppliers contribute to EDPR success  52(2) suppliers are considered as critical  Critical suppliers represent  55%  (3)  of the invoiced volume in Europe and  67%(3)  in North America  99%(1)  Local Purchases  (Purchases in countries of operation of EDPR)  SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF THE SUPPLY CHAIN EDPR has defined policies, procedures and standards to ensure the several aspects that fill in with the sustainability of the supply chain, as 1well as the management and mitigation of any type of environmental, social or ethical risks in the supply chain.  PRO GRES S Sustainable Procurement Policy  2016  EDP Group has defined a Sustainable Procurement Policy, which is the framework for the procurement process. The policy includes aspects of law compliance, environmental policy, respect for communities, communication with stakeholders, ethics, confidentiality, conflicts of interest, human rights and health and safety. EDPR works with mature suppliers and companies that look to meet the demanding requirements on quality, environment and prevention, as well as to comply with the economical/financial solvency requirements. 1 2 3  Based on # of purchase orders placed in 2016 Critical suppliers as defined as per EDP formal corporate standard methodology Based on the total invoiced volume in 2016  85  85   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Policies, Procedures and Standards •  Procurement  During 2016, an extensive characterization study of EDPR’s purchases was developed, aiming a deeper knowledge about the economic, social and environmental impacts of EDPR’s supply chain.  •  EDPR takes into account the 10 principles of the UN Global Compact and Ethical Code acceptance, the Health & Safety and Quality certificates, as well as technical quality and economical/financial solvency of suppliers.  •  Procurement  EDPR has a Procurement Manual, which includes sustainability principles to be taken into account when contracting products or services.  •  These principles summarize the most relevant aspects for EDPR in terms of sustainability in the supply chain: health and safety, respect for the environment, ethics, local development and innovation.  •  EDPR is governed under a strong sense of ethics and requires its suppliers to have no conflicts with the company’s ethical standards.  EDPR´s suppliers must know and accept by written the principles established in the Code of Ethics. : EDPR’s Code of Ethics is available in www.edpr.com •  •  EDPR is a signatory of the UN Global Compact for Sustainable Development and is committed to implement these principles as well as to promote the adoption of these principles on its area of influence.  •  EDPR´s suppliers must accept to comply with the UN Global Compact’s ten principles, on human rights, labor, environment and anti-corruption  100% of the EDPR critical suppliers are aligned with Global Compact criteria and EDPR’s Code of Ethics  and provide the confirmation as signatories of the UN Global Compact directives or a written declaration of their acceptance. •  Health & Safety System, based on the OSHAS 18001:2007 specifications require EDPR’s employees and all other individuals working on behalf of EDPR to follow best practices in those areas, as required in EDPR’s OH&S Policy.  The health and safety management system is supported by different manuals, control procedures, instructions and specifications which ensure the effective execution of EDPR’s OH&S Policy. : EDPR´s Health & Safety Policy are available in www.edpr.com •  •  EDPR is committed to integrate the respect for the environment and environmental management into all phases of the business through the value chain and ensure that all stakeholders, including suppliers, have the necessary skills to do so.  Environment and Policies  •  EDPR´s suppliers shall adopt all necessary measures to ensure strict compliance with all applicable environmental regulations as well as EDPR´s Environment and Biodiversity Policies, internal norms, procedures and systems in place as regards to environmental management.  •  EDPR has implemented an Environmental Management System (EMS) developed and certified according to the international standard ISO 14001:2004. EDPR´s suppliers shall know and understand the EMS and ensure the full compliance with the procedures set.  • Suppliers shall make the EMS available to its employees and subcontractors. : EDPR´s Environment and Biodiversity Policies are available in www.edpr.com  EDPR suppliers have successfully perform the approval processes established by EDP Group. The rule “pass or fail” is applied to suppliers. If they do not meet the main requirements set by EDPR they will not be selected to provide services. For all suppliers considered as critical (regardless of the purchase volume) EDPR ensures from the bidding to the time of providing the service (work execution or maintenance) the compliance of technical quality, economical/financial solvency, and health, safety and environmental management.  86 86   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  MANAGEMENT AND MITIGATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL OR ETHICAL RISKS EDPR monitors critical suppliers during their services delivery, taking into account aspects as quality, safety, health and environment (waste management, oil spills, etc.). EDPR also ensures the compliance with standards, commitments and procedures of EDPR in all value chain. A) During the execution phase, the construction manager works closely with a health supervisor, a safety and environmental supervisor and holds weekly meetings with suppliers (BOP contractor and, where applicable, the turbine supplier). Contractors receive feedback and improvement plans are established in the areas of quality, health, safety and environment through performance reports. In addition, the company also has external supervision in these areas. B) During the wind farms operation phase, the wind farm manager is responsible for service quality and compliance with the rules and health, safety and environmental procedures. These processes are reinforced by the management systems according to OSHAS 18001 and ISO 14001. Contractors integrate these management systems, as their performance in these areas is crucial for EDPR.  Suppliers share with EDPR their new solutions, products or upgrades to improve collaboration between both parties.  EDPR uses applications for health and safety and environmental management, including regulatory and obligation tracking, which work as collaborative tools therefore involving the entire organization and suppliers to prevent work and environmental accidents. In addition, in the wind farms are carried out drills regarding health and safety and environmental accidents or incidents. The relevant aspects for EDPR in relation to sustainability in the supply chain are Innovation, Health and Safety, Respect for the Environment, Ethics and Local Development. These aspects are expressed in Procurement Manual.  83% of EDPR’s critical suppliers have Occupation Health & Safety System (OHS) (Critical suppliers as defined as per EDP formal corporate standard methodology).  13,156 Hours of training on OHS to EDPR’s Suppliers, involving 165 companies and 2,227 workers. 1,052 Audits to Suppliers in the scope of OHS.  HE AL SA TH FE A T  ON TI VA O  D N Y  IN N  Innovation is one of the keys to sustain competitive advantage and support growth. EDPR worked jointly with a supplier to install the first battery energy storage in Cobadin Wind Farm in Romania. It is a relevant source of flexibility that will play an important role in renewables development and integration, since it can balance power variability and supply more economically to the grid.  100% of the critical suppliers are aligned with criteria for impacts on society.  R EN ESP VI ECT RO FO NM R ENT  More than 735* Million EUR gross value added associated to EDPR’s Supply Chain.  (Critical suppliers as defined as per EDP formal corporate standard methodology).  A L NT LO C P ME LO DEVE  More than 20,000* jobs associated to EDPR’s Supply Chain.  88% of EDPR’s critical suppliers have environmental systems  300* Thousand ton GHG emissions associated to EDPR’s direct and indirect Supply Chain, 5%* of which are related to direct suppliers.  ETHICS  100% of the critical suppliers are aligned with labor practices criteria and human rights criteria. ~0%* EDPR’s purchases identified as having significant risk for incidents of child labor, forced or compulsory labor, freedom of association. *Data resulting from characterization of the supply chain performed by PwC using ESCHER (Efficient Supply Chain Economic and Environmental Reporting) tool, based on 2014 purchasing data  87  87   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  3.3.4. MEDIA Mass media organizations around the world represent a very important stakeholder group to EDPR. EDPR’s corporate reputation and brand visibility depends on media organizations, which is why we take great care in each interaction we have with them. We keep all media organizations informed about the initiatives that the company carries out, whether these are related to financial issues, company performance, corporate social responsibility or any other relevant happenings. For that purpose, the Department of Communication and Stakeholders Management has developed a series of communication channels to make the transmission of information as dynamic and fluid as possible. One of the main channels is the corporate website (www.edpr.com), which includes three large sections dedicated to media: news, where all the company’s official communications are publicized; media center, a content repository where the media can obtain photographs, videos and other materials; and finally, contact information. Other media communication channels are press conferences, interviews with company managers and conference calls. In 2016, interactions with the media generated news primarily in the markets of Portugal, Spain, North America, Poland and Italy, but generally, in all markets where we operate. These news reflect the company’s strategy for each of these markets. Portugal was the largest source of the news items, with notable positive coverage of EDPR’s image, including information about the company’s share price, financial performance, our partnership with China Three Gorges (CTG), education initiatives, plans for expansion and investment (especially foreign investment), new contracts and energy production data. In Spain, the company’s expansion plans were especially noteworthy, while in the United States and Canada, news tended to focus mostly on Power Purchase Agreements (PPA).  88 88   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  3.3. Safety First Zero accidents mindset Guaranteeing the health, safety and well-being of our employees and contractors is a top priority at EDPR and this commitment is supported by our Health and Safety policy. At EDPR, we are conscious that we work in a sector that is particularly sensitive to the occupational risk, therefore we place special emphasis on prevention by training, communicating and certifying our facilities. As an integral part of our health and safety strategy, employees participate in training courses and risk assessment activities based on the potential risks associated with their position. Our employees follow the guidelines rigorously and strive to achieve a safe workplace for all those who provide services in our facilities. Health & Safety committees and subcommittees throughout EDPR support the implementation of health and safety measures by means of collecting information from different operational levels and involving employees with the establishment and communication of a preventative plan. In order to achieve our zero accidents target, EDPR has implemented health and safety management systems based on the OSHAS 18001:2007 specifications. The standards and procedures of these systems are adapted to the specificities of each geography where they are implemented and are developed based on the country’s regulation and industry’s best practices. Our commitment to the health and safety of our employees and contractors is further supported through the OHSAS 18001 certification and we are working actively to have all installed capacity certified by 2020.  Indicators:  4.63  The implementation of our health and safety management systems allows us  3.78  to manage and prevent future accidents with the objective of reaching our zero accident goal. During 2016, EDPR registered 25 accidents. The trend is decreasing in Europe, US and Brazil but it is partially offset by higher shortterm absence accidents in Mexico, impacted by higher construction activity in  27  the country. Additionally, the severity rate increased, due to one long-term  25  absence coming from 2015 and nine during 2016, which have led to 83% of the total days lost. Overall, the trend is improving despite the increase in the number of accidents  2015  in Mexico. A greater focus on communication of our policies plus the realization  2016 # accidents with absence Frequency rate  of the benefits from OHSAS certification that will occur in 2018 in Mexico will help to improve these statistics. Europe, US and Brazil have lower H&S indicators due to more training hours and emergency plans both for staff and contractors.  Training & emergency plans:  CERTIFIED MW*(%)  TRAINING (hours)  23k  DRILLS (#)  95%  259  *OHSAS 18001 certification. Calculation based on 2016YE installed capacity. In 2015, calculation was based on 2014YE installed capacity.  Note: Includes staff and contractors data.  89  89   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART THE NEWART  3.4. Environment 3.4. Environment Life cycle approach in the environmental management Life cycle approach in the environmental management  Wind power is one of the most environmentally friendly ways of producing energy. Its contribution to global warming environmentally friendly ways of producing energy. Its contribution to global warming is significantly lower than the one from fossil fuel based energy sources. The impact of our business on the environment based energy sources. The impact of our business on the environment is small but nevertheless EDPR works on a daily basis to hold itself to a higher standard. nevertheless EDPR works on a daily basis to hold itself to a higher standard.  1  Raw Materials Extraction Raw Materials Extraction and Components and Components Manufacturing Stages Manufacturing Stages  Incorporate respect for the environment and management of environmental aspects in all phases of business processes throughout the value chain processes the value is one of the pillars of our environmental strategy. the pillars of our environmental Life cycle assessments revealed that most wind farm and solar plant environmental impacts are concentrated in the raw materials’ extraction and components’ raw 2 manufacturing stages.2 EDPR is not directly involved in those upstream those upstream processes but is committed to promote sustainable is committed to promote practices in the supply chain according to EDP Sustainable Procurement Policy to better respond to better to the increasing needs of sustainability and the sustainability development of our supply chain.  2  Wind Farm Wind Farm Set Up Set Up  Wind farm set up, including construction and construction and installation works, is concentrated in a short period of time and has a very limited impact compared with impact upstream processes. Nevertheless it is closely followed by our highly qualified teams to minimize potential qualified teams to minimize potential disturbances. A thorough process based on our in-house expertise process in-house expertise ensures the location of EDPR facilities in the best sites, EDPR facilities in the best assuring top-class construction standards and respect for the environment and local communities. During the construction process, we work to minimize the construction process, we work minimize impacts and disturbances and return the land to its initial integrity. In 2016, more than 9 ha were restored and 63 ha were restored. In almost 20,000 plantations were access In most cases,less most cases, wind turbines and done. roads occupy wind one percent access land inoccupy lessproject area than turbines and of the roads the entire than one percent of the land in the entire project area and the and the remaining land is still available for traditional remaining land is still available for traditional activities. activities.  Climate change is already having an impact on biodiversity, and is projected to become a more significant threat Climate change is already having an impact on biodiversity, and is projected to become a more significant threat in the coming decades. Wind and solar energy provides a major contribution to protecting biodiversity from climate decades. and solar energy provides change since its contribution to global warming is significantly less than fossil fuel based energy sources. to global warming less than fossil fuel based energy  90   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDP RENOVÁVEIS 2016 EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  3  Operation Stage  As an The operation stage is the core of our business. As an owner and operator, EDPR is committed to maintaining long-term operations of our projects for the benefit of our stakeholders while always keeping our environmental keeping our environmental impact to a minimum. The proper management of the environmental aspects during operation is achieved operation achieved through the Environmental Management System (EMS), developed in accordance with the ISO 14001 international standard and certified by an independent certifying organization. 89% of EDPR’s installed capacity is covered by ISO 14001 certification1. certification1. The operating phase can be extended beyond the useful life by repowering the windfarms, replacing old  4  End of Useful Life Life  turbines are At the end of their useful life wind turbines are dismantled to return the environment to its original state. Although EDPR has not yet dismantled any facility, from the environmental point of view there are two main aspects to consider: land restoration and proper treatment of the wastes generated. Properly managing generated. Properly managing wind turbines at the end of its life from a sustainable life from a sustainable point of view, is crucial to maximize the environmental environmental positive impacts of wind energy from a life cycle approach. Wind turbines’ recycling at the end of their service life avoids impacts associated to raw materials’ associated to raw materials’ extraction, providing significant environmental benefits providing significant environmental benefits and contributing to create a circular economy.  equipment by new one with greater capacity and performance, producing clean energyhybrids will make EDPR is renewing its entire fleet and for a few years more. of its new fleet of vehicles. In line with its core up 70%  business, EDPR has chosen hybrid vehicles based EDPR is renewing its entire fleet and hybrids will on their low fuel consumption and reduced emissions make up 70% of its new fleet of vehicles. In line All vehicles will be incorporated into the EDPR fleet with its core business, EDPR has chosen hybrid gradually over 2017 in Spain, France, Italy, Poland vehicles based on their low fuel consumption and and Romania, as well as Brazil. reduced emissions All vehicles will be incorporated into the EDPR fleet gradually over 2017 in Spain, France, Italy, Poland and Romania, as well as Brazil.  The average recyclability of wind turbines has been The average recyclability of wind turbines has been calculated as 80-90%.2 The components contributing calculated as 80-90%.2 The components contributing to recyclability are metal parts manufactured from iron, to recyclability are metal parts manufactured from iron, steel, aluminum and copper. But the industry faces steel, aluminum and copper. But the industry faces a challenge regarding wind turbine blades since landfills a challenge regarding wind turbine blades since landfills are currently the main destination for composites in are currently the main destination for composites in Europe. EDPR supports R3FIBER project, an innovative Europe. EDPR supports R3FIBER project, an innovative solution that provides a green technology to recycle wind solution that provides a green technology to recycle wind blades to obtain high quality fibers that can be reused blades to obtain high quality fibers that can be reused in various sectors, contributing to circular economy. in various sectors, contributing to circular economy.  EDPR wind farms, with a projected life span of 25 years, will pay back its life cycle energy costs in less than a year2, which means more than 24 years of a wind farm’s life just producing clean energy.  1 Calculation based on 2016YE installed capacity. In 2015, calculation was based on 2014YE installed capacity. Calculation based on 2016YE installed capacity. In 2015, calculation was based on 2014YE installed capacity. 2 According to the Life Cycle Assessments of our main turbine suppliers. According to the Life Cycle Assessments of our main turbine  1 2  91  91   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART THE NEWART  3.5. Innovation EDPR, as a global renewable energy leading company, is proactively and consistently looking for new research and innovative initiatives and solutions focused on the reduction of the cost of energy through-out the life cycle of its assets. Also, EDPR is addressing the challenges related with the required capabilities to fit in the near future power and market systems, ensuring adequate technological skills and preserving our competitive advantage in the sector. Currently research and innovation actions and efforts at EDPR are mainly focused on addressing challenges related with investigation of the main trends in offshore and onshore wind and solar energy, energy storage and flexible grid integration solutions, as well as new O&M procedures and strategies.  Offshore Technology  Windfloat Project The WindFloat 1 showed the physical survivability of the  Key priority for offshore  platform on a harsh environment and set the tone for  wind is to continue to  the pre-commercial phase, in order to prove economic  follow a cost decrease path,  viability.  achieving a sustainable and  After 5 consistent years of operation with more than 17  as fast as possible LCOE and reducing technology risks in the coming years mainly by economies of scale, technology innovation and higher capacity turbines (>6 MW).  GW of electricity produced demonstration period is over. This milestone represents EDPR successful innovation approach to the offshore market by addressing the real problem of lack of solutions for deep waters. After successfully reaching the end of the lifetime of the first phase of the project, the next step in the development of WindFloat technology will be the pre-  The most capital intensive  commercial phase, named ‘WindFloat Atlantic’ (WFA),  areas of offshore wind  the first worldwide full scale floating wind power plant.  industry are the turbines, foundations and installation. Since the offshore wind market is evolving moving further from shore into deep waters and with increased average turbine capacity,  With a total capacity of 25 MW in a 100 meters depth area in the Portuguese coast of Viana do Castelo, each of the 3 platforms will be equipped with a 8 MW commercial turbine. Under NER300 funding programme, this project has attracted renowned world players, such as Repsol, Trust Wind, Mitsubishi Corporaton and Chyioda Corporation. COD is expected in the summer of 2019.  innovation in foundations and in installation that address the deeper waters challenge are key drivers for LCOE reduction and  Demogravi3 Project Funded by the EU Horizon 2020 Program aims to  increased competitiveness.  demonstrate and validate an innovative hybrid concrete-  EDPR is developing a  steel, self-buoyant bottom standing foundation  portfolio of solutions, namely creating technology innovative options for intermediate and deep water markets. Knowledge and experience acquired  technology for offshore wind power plants located in intermediate water depths between 35 and 60m. The complete unit (turbine and foundation) will be built and fully assembled inshore, transported to the site, water ballasted to be installed in the seabed, and decommissioned without the need of using heavy lift  with WindFloat and  vessels.  DemoGravi3 technologies  The European consortium developing this project is  places EDPR as a front  leaded by EDPR and is composed by a highly  runner in the offshore wind  complementary and fit for purpose mix of commercial  business innovation paving  companies and non-profit entities: TYPSA, ASM Energia,  the way to achieve  Univ. Politécnica de Madrid, WavEC, Acciona  competitiveness in future  Infraestructuras, Fraunhofer Gesellschaft IWES, Gavin &  commercial projects by  Doherty Geo Solutions and Global Maritime AS.  challenging the offshore  The project will have a duration of 4 years. Installation  wind supply chain.  will take place in summer 2017, at the consented and grid connected site of Aguçadoura (Portugal).  92   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Solar Technology Hybrid Wind And PV Pilot Project EDPR is developing a demonstration pilot project in Spain of an hybrid technology (wind+photovoltaic) power plant sharing the same BoP infrastructure. The objective is to validate this concept both technical and commercially, to allow the definition of the business case for a real size project based on wind and solar resources complementarity. CPV-LAB Project A test platform embedded in a commercial photovoltaic power plant under construction in Portugal, to evaluate the performance of new photovoltaic technologies such as CPV, glass-glass and bifacial, with the objective of gaining experience and creating solid knowledge in order to maximize profitability in future investments.  Energy Storage Battery energy storage is a relevant source of flexibility that will play an important role in renewables development and integration, since it can balance power variability and supply more economically to the grid. In addition, the rapidly falling cost of batteries provides particular interest for EDPR’s future investments in energy storage. The ‘Stocare’ demonstration project, embedded in Cobadin wind power plant, is the first one to use Lithium ion batteries for electricity storage in Romania and also marks the beginning of using combined energy storage solutions and renewable power generation in EDPR, since the end of 2016. Cobadin’s 1MW/1MWh energy storage system supplied by Siemens works as a proof of concept, aiming to evaluate its potential to enhance renewables power plants economics and integration in the electrical system. The innovative energy management and control platform now being developed aims to provide solutions that respond to output fluctuations in energy production and test new forms of power control under real conditions to maximize yield, besides obtaining operational experience and knowledge from testing different use cases, allowing EDPR to evaluate the future business case by calculating the overall costs, revenues and savings, alongside with risks and opportunities identification. Benefits from this project will result from the reduction of forecast errors from the active power schedule submitted day-ahead to reduce balancing costs and an advanced curtailment management to minimize energy losses. In addition, as remuneration schemes for ancillary services become increasingly available in certain markets, it also aims to test applications such as frequency regulation and voltage support, through the development of algorithms and optimization of control schemes that could later be used in other projects and markets.  Operation and Maintenance The maturity of the wind onshore market, with a growing amount of operating capacity and with turbines becoming increasingly complex, highlights to EDPR the need to devote more efforts to advanced O&M solutions and strategies aimed at achieving cost reduction and increase energy yield due to enhanced data analysis and O&M procedures. With so many sources, volumes and variety of data available, significant innovation efforts are required to properly treat and analyze such wealth of information to create added value knowledge in asset operations. EDPR is starting to incorporate big data technologies using advanced analytics predictive models for wind turbines lifetime optimization and to build reliable and streamlined endof-life strategies. EDPR is also involved in several initiatives to enable predictive maintenance, related with the use of new enhanced sensors, condition monitoring systems and airborne drones for inspection to open new possibilities for data collection.  93 93    4 Sustainability  Materiality Assessment  99  Economic Performance  101  Environmental Performance  105  Social Performance  114  Reporting Principles  132  External Checks  133   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  96   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  97   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  16  40   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  4 Sustainability  4.1. Materiality Assessment (G4-18, G4-20, G4-21, G4-26, G4-27) The macro-economic context, where the challenges of sustainability are increasing, summing up with the diversity of EDPR’s stakeholders, results in a large and complex list of important issues, which must be prioritized according to its relevance and significance. An issue is considered material when it influences the decision, the action and the performance of an organization and its stakeholders.  4.1.1. BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES EDPR’s material issues were identified and the results achieved supported the preparation of this Annual Report, as reflected in the company’s management strategy and, in particular, in its agenda for sustainability.  4.1.2. METHODOLOGY The methodology adopted is based on the Accountability standards and information is collected corporately and in business units. Materiality is obtained by the interception of the issues identified by stakeholders with the importance given internally by the business. The topics identified by the company are prioritized according to the frequency with which they appear in different categories analysed. RELEVANCE FOR SOCIETY The relevance for society is determined by the importance/impact of a specific theme from a perspective external to the company, designated as society perspective. Therefore the society vision reflects the vision of the several stakeholder groups that have influence on or are influenced by EDPR’s activities. This vision must be obtained through sources that ensure independence from the company by means of collecting on most cases external data. In parallel, the establishment of a society vision is also supported by documents, analysis and international/national specific studies that allow a broad perspective of the emerging trends in the sustainability area. Consequently, the company considers that the vision of the several stakeholders reflects the vision of society, thus allowing the assessment of the expectations outside EDPR. RELEVANCE FOR BUSINESS The vision of the business is obtained through the evaluation of the importance/impact of a specific theme from a perspective internal to the company. This vision is originated from the analysis of the defined business strategic goals as these depict the current positioning and concerns of EDPR and reflects the future vision of the business. RESULTS (G4-18, G4-19, G4-20, G4-21, G4-26, G4-27) The materiality matrix describes visually and promptly the most sensitive and impacting themes by comparing the relevance to society with the relevance to the business. The critical and sensitive themes for the business, obtained from the analysis of the materiality matrix, allows the company to drive the strategy and support the decision making process as well as to focus the report of information based on shared interests between company and stakeholder, thus facilitating the relationship among them.  99  99   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Materiality Matrix  +  Promotion of Renewable Energies' Production  New Business Opportunities  Water Consumption  Biodiversity Climate Change  Environmental Management Responsible and Transparent Communication/Marketing  Citizenship  Corporate Governance  Attractiveness and Talent Retention  Importance for Society  Electricity and Gas Supply  Universal Access to Energy  Corporate Ethics  Working Conditions  Health and Safety Supply Chain Management  Financials / Operating Profit and Tax Transparency Risk Management  Macroeconomic Environment Local Communities R&D+I  Human Rights  -  100  Importance for Business  +   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  4.2. Economic Performance  G4 DISCLOSURE ON MANAGEMENT APPROACH Renewable energies have a strong influence in the local communities. Assets are usually constructed in remote locations, bringing positive economic benefits to the local communities, while contributing to the world fight against climate change. Additionally, we believe that innovation is key to sustain competitive advantage and support growth. For us, innovation is about new technologies for more renewable energy - such as offshore wind - but that is not all: it is also about  Assets are usually constructed in remote locations, bringing positive economic benefits to the local communities.  attitude, looking for ongoing improvement every day at what we do. A detailed disclosure of different projects lead by EDPR can be found at Innovation section.  G4 EC1 - DIRECT ECONOMIC VALUE GENERATED AND DISTRIBUTED €m  2016  2015  1,485  1,372  251  359  Economic value generated and distributed Turnover Other income  Economic Value Generated in 2016  Gains/(losses) on the sale of financial assets  2  Share of profit in associates  0  -2  54  61  620  0  Financial income  1,792  1,790  31  22  Supplies and services  305  293  Other costs  135  189  94  84  404  347  50  51  153  129  1,172  1,115  620  1,172 m€ generated  6 75  Economic value generated Cost of raw material and consumables used  Personnel costs Financial expenses Current tax Dividends Economic value distributed Economic value accumulated  1,172  Value Distributed Value Accumulated  101  101   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  G4 EC2 - FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS AND OTHER RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE ORGANIZATION'S ACTIVITIES DUE TO CLIMATE CHANGE The cost of doubling the renewable energy share by 2030 would be US$ 290 billion per year which is expected to be at least 4 and up to 15 times less than the external costs avoided. Source: IRENA  Human activities are releasing critical amounts of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases (GHG), which trap heat and steadily drive up our planet’s temperature, eventually compromising our climate. As anthropogenic GHG result primarily from the combustion of fossil fuels, effective action in the energy sector is, consequentially, essential to tackle climate change issues. According to IRENA reaching a 30% renewables share by 2030, coupled with higher energy efficiency, would be enough to prevent global temperatures from rising more than 2°C above preindustrial levels. It is becoming increasingly clear that the investments required to reduce emissions will be modest in comparison with the benefits from avoided climate change damages. Therefore, renewable energy is a cornerstone for achieving climate targets and onshore wind, because of its maturity and competitiveness, is expected to be at the forefront of the required transformation of our energy sector. •  Reducing electricity price When wind production is available, the market price goes down, for the same level of electricity demand and up to 15 times.  For additional information refer to the Business Environment Section.  G4 EC3 - COVERAGE OF THE ORGANIZATION'S DEFINED BENEFIT PLAN OBLIGATIONS •  Information on EDPR benefit plan obligations, can be found in Note 10 in our Financial Statements.  G4 EC4 - FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE RECEIVED FROM GOVERNMENT • Information on EDPR financial assistance received from government through Production Tax Credits, Cash Grants and other Tax savings in the US, can be found in Income from institutional partnerships in US wind farms and Amortization of deferred income (government grants) in our Consolidated Income Statement and additional details on Note 7, Note 12 and Note 30 in our Financial Statements.  G4 EC5 - RANGE OF RATIOS OF STANDARD ENTRY LEVEL WAGE COMPARED TO LOCAL MINIMUM WAGE AT SIGNIFICANT LOCATIONS OF OPERATION The values presented in the table above shows the average standard entry-level wage compared to the local minimum wage for each one of the countries where we have presence. To protect the privacy of employees’ wages in those countries where our headcount is smaller, we do not disclose the information by country and gender.  %  2016  2015  Standard entry level wage vs local minimum wage Europe  253%  259%  North America  234%  224%  Brazil  337%  270%  Note: 2015 Europe % restated. Belgium information was removed to protect the privacy of employees in the country due to the small headcount.  102 102   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  G4 EC6 - PROPORTION OF SENIOR MANAGEMENT HIRED FROM THE LOCAL COMMUNITY AT SIGNIFICANT LOCATIONS OF OPERATION Our Code of Ethics contains specific clauses of non-discrimination and equal opportunities in line with the company’s culture of diversity. This is reflected in our procedures for hiring people via a non-discriminatory selection processes. A potential employee’s race, gender, sexual orientation, religion, marital status, disability, political orientation or opinions of any other nature, ethnic or social origin, place of birth or trade union membership are not considered. There are no specific procedures explicitly requiring local recruitment. However a  100% of the new Directors have been hired internally.  high percentage of our employees are hired from the same country in which the company operates.  % % of local recruitment  2016 Directors  Europe  83%  North America  79%  Brazil  100%  Corporate  74%  G4 EC7 - DEVELOPMENT AND IMPACT OF INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTS AND SERVICES SUPPORTED Wind and solar energy require infrastructure investments which benefit surrounding communities. This includes the reinforcement of existing electricity networks and the rehabilitation of existing roads or the construction of new roads. The investment in roads is necessary in order to transport heavy equipment (wind turbine components, power transformers, etc.) to the site during construction. The improved road system facilitates future maintenance activities after  Wind and solar energy require infrastructure investments which benefit surrounding communities.  construction works, as well as improves access to remote locations for the surrounding communities. During the operation of our wind farms, these roads are maintained and further opportunities may be identified to increase the positive impact in the community. The integration of our generation capacity may also require upgrades in the distribution and transmission grids that belong to the system operators. Those upgrades indirectly benefit the quality of service offered in the surrounding areas by minimizing electricity supply interruptions. In 2016, EDPR invested 4.7 million Euros to develop community roads and 11.4 million Euros to improve public electric facilities.  EDPR invested 4.7 million Euros to develop community roads and 11.4 million Euros to improve public electric facilities.  G4 EC8 - UNDERSTANDING AND DESCRIBING SIGNIFICANT INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACTS, INCLUDING THE EXTENT OF IMPACTS Renewable energy technologies are viewed not only as tools for mitigating climate change, but are also increasingly recognized as investments that can provide direct and indirect economic advantages by reducing dependence on imported  103  103   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  fuels (and hence, improving trade balances), enhancing local air quality and safety, advancing energy access and security, propelling economic development, and, creating jobs. •  For additional information on indirect economic impacts of our energy, please refer to the Business Environment Section.  G4 EC9 - PROPORTION OF SPENDING ON LOCAL SUPPLIERS AT SIGNIFICANT LOCATIONS OF OPERATION  99%  *  of the purchases were sourced from local suppliers.  At EDPR, there is no specific policy or in-house procedure for preferring locally based suppliers. However, under equal commercial terms, we choose local suppliers in order to enhance the socio-economic sustainability of the 12 countries across Europe and the Americas where we are present. In this way, around 99%* of the purchases were sourced from local suppliers (purchases in countries of operation of EDPR). Additionally, during the construction of our projects, the local community can see an influx of temporary local construction workers and suppliers that provide a positive impact on the local economy. Note:  •  104 104  *  is based on # of purchase orders placed in 2016.  For additional information, please refer to Suppliers Section   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  4.3. Environmental Performance  G4 DISCLOUSURE ON MANAGEMENT APPROACH  politica ambiental_England copia.pdf 1 11/10/2011 13:43:18  ENVIR ONM ENTA L POL ICY  Wind power is one of the most environmentally friendly ways of producing energy. Its contribution to global warming is significantly lower than the one from fossil  We consider that proactive environmental management generates value and constitutes the duty of any socially responsible company.  fuel based energy sources. The impact of our business on the environment is  Our ambition in the international setting in which we operate is to be leaders and a benchmark in environmental management of business and in stakeholder involvement in the promotion and implementation of good practices in this field.  small but nevertheless EDPR works on a daily basis to hold itself to a higher  We foster a corporate culture in which the initiatives and activities making up our business are consistent with environmental responsibility and we encourage innovation and continuous improvement in products, services and environmental performance.  standard.  As a result, our organizational culture embraces the following values and guidelines:  Incorporate respect for the environment and management of environmental aspects in all phases of business processes throughout the value chain and ensure that everyone involved, including suppliers, has the necessary, adequate skills for the purpose.  Life cycle assessments revealed that most wind farm and solar plants environmental impacts are concentrated in the raw materials’ extraction and  C  M  Y  *  components’ manufacturing stages . EDPR is not directly involved in those upstream processes but is committed to promote sustainable practices in the supply chain according to EDP Sustainable Procurement Policy to better respond to the increasing needs of sustainability and the development of our supply chain. Wind farm and solar plant set up stage is concentrated in a short period of time and has a very limited impact compared with upstream process. Nevertheless it is closely followed by our highly qualified teams to minimize potential disturbances.  Base relations with the authorities and other stakeholders on ethical principles of transparency, honesty and integrity.  CM  MY  CY  CMY  K  Constantly improve environmental performance, especially in the prevention of pollution and minimization of its impacts. Comply with the requirements of applicable environmental legislation as well as other, voluntary commitments. Manage environmental risks in order to eliminate or minimize the negative impacts of our activities both in normal circumstances and in the event of emergencies, accidents or disasters. Manage the impact on biodiversity of our business activities and seek an overall positive balance in this field. Foster the use of renewable energy sources and the best technologies in order to preserve natural resources and reduce and prevent pollution. Promote energy eﬃciency and the rational use of energy as one of the main options compatible with the sustainable use of resources. Consider stakeholders expectations in environmentally relevant processes and their communication. Promote knowledge and the dissemination of good practices in the environmental field.  Approved by the Executive Committee, January 2011  The operation stage is the core of our business. As an owner and operator, EDPR is committed to maintaining long-term operations of our projects for the benefit of our stakeholders while always keeping our environmental impact to a minimum. The proper management of the environmental aspects during operation is achieved through the Environmental Management System (EMS), developed in accordance with the ISO 14001 international standard and certified by an independent certifying organization. 89%* * of EDPR’s installed capacity is  EDPR Environmental Policy, available at www.edpr.com  covered by ISO 14001 certification. At the end of their useful life wind turbines are dismantled to return the environment to its original state. From the environmental point of view there are two main aspects to consider: the land restoration and the proper treatment of the wastes generated. Properly managing wind turbines at the end of its life from a sustainable point of view, is crucial to maximize the environmental positive impacts of wind energy from a life cycle approach. Wind turbines’ recycling at the end of their service life avoid impacts associated to raw materials’ extraction providing significant environmental benefits and contributing to create a circular economy. EDPR wind farms, with a projected life span of 25 years, will pay back its life cycle energy costs in less than a year*, which means more than 24 years of a wind  c.350x EDPR produces about c. 350 times the electricity consumed.  farm’s life just producing clean energy. EDPR Annual Report’s information included in the Sustainability Chapter is based on the operational phase. Note: *According to the Life Cycle Assessments of our main turbine suppliers. Note: **Calculation based on 2016YE installed capacity. In 2015, calculation was based on 2014YE installed capacity.  •  For additional information on indirect economic impacts of our energy, please refer to the Business Environment Section and Environment Section.  105  105   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  G4 EN3 - ENERGY CONSUMPTION WITHIN THE ORGANIZATION WATER CONSUMPTION PER TECHNOLOGY  Wind turbines and solar panels require a small amount of electricity to operate. This energy consumption is generally self-consumed. Given the intermittency of wind generation we sometimes need to consume electricity from the grid.  MWh  2016  2015  %  Energy consumption Wind farms: Electricity consumption (MWh)  67,423 66,602  1%  Offices: Nuclear 12.7 m3/MWh  Coal 1.9 m3/MWh  Electricity consumption (MWh)  3,776  3,666  3%  Gas (MWh)  1,009  996  1%  Note: Gas conversion factor according to Agência Portuguesa de Ambiente. Note: 2015 Gas data and offices Electricty consumption restated.  G4 EN6 - REDUCTION OF ENERGY CONSUMPTION Our activity is based on clean energy generation, and we produce about 350 times Gas 0.7 m3/MWh  Wind Zero m3/MWh  Source: 2014 EWEA  the electricity we consume. However, we are conscious about promoting a culture of rational use of resources and we promote many internal campaigns to promote sustainable behaviors as is explained in our website www.edpr.com  Saving water with wind energy  G4 EN8 - TOTAL WATER WITHDRAWAL BY SOURCE Generation from wind energy does not consume water in its operational processes. The water is consumed mainly for human use. The consumption of water per electricity generated accounts for 0.76 litres/MWh. Even so, the company actively seeks to adopt more eco-efficient practices. An example of this is that in 2016 38 substations had rainwater collection and treatment systems installed to cover their own water supply needs. • For additional information about what sets EDPR apart in terms of environmental management, please refer to Sustainability section at www.edpr.com  106 106   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  G4 EN11 - OPERATIONAL SITES OWNED, LEASED, MANAGED IN, OR ADJACENT TO, PROTECTED AREAS AND AREAS OF HIGH BIODIVERSITY VALUE OUTSIDE PROTECTED AREAS Type of Operation  Position In Relation With Protected Area  Facility Area In Protected Natural Area (Ha)  % Facility Area In Protected Natural Area (%)  Country  Facility Name  Cerfontaine  Wind farm  Adjacent  0.0  0%  Belgium  Chimay II  Wind farm  Adjacent  0.0  0%  Chimay II  Wind farm  Adjacent  0.0  0%  Attribute of the Protected Area  Status of the Protected Area Natura 2000  Patay  Wind farm  Inside  41.6  100%  Terrestrial Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial  Ségur  Wind farm  Inside  1.3  100%  Terrestrial  Portugal  Wind farm  Inside  1.3  100%  Terrestrial  Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind  Inside Inside Inside Inside Inside  1.1 0.9 39.9 41.2 30.2  100% 100% 100% 100% 91%  Tomaszow  Wind farm  Adjacent  0.0  0%  Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind  Inside Partially Within Partially Within Inside Inside Inside Partially Within Inside  6.3 0.1 6.0 4.9 8.9 14.6 30.3 8.1  100% 1% 88% 100% 100% 100% 91% 100%  Alto do Talefe  Poland  Ayssènes - Le Truel Marcellois Massingy Tarzy Francourville Ilza Pena Suar Açor Açor II Cinfaes Bustelo Vila Cova Falperra-Rechãzinha Fonte da Quelha  France  Wind farm  Inside  9.2  100%  Fonte da Mesa Malanhito Madrinha Safra-Coentral Negrelo e Guilhado Testos  Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind  Partially Within Partially Within Inside Inside Inside Partially Within  8.2 1.5 4.1 19.7 9.6 2.9  83% 3% 60% 100% 100% 22%  Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial  farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm  Serra Alvoaça  Partially Within  7.8  61%  Terrestrial  Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind  Inside Partially Within Partially Within Partially Within Partially Within Partially Within Adjacent Adjacent Adjacent Adjacent Adjacent Adjacent Partially Within  6.8 1.0 0.1 7.1 9.1 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1  100% 41% 0% 42% 34% 1% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%  Burila Mica  Solar plant  Inside  22.7  100%  Sierra de Boquerón SET Parralejos La Cabaña Corme Hoya Gonzalo  Wind Wind Wind Wind Wind  Inside Inside Partially Within Partially Within Partially Within  10.4 0.9 8.2 2.6 0.7  100% 100% 53% 17% 4%  Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial-Marine Terrestrial  Tahivilla  Romania  Wind farm  Tocha Padrela/Soutelo Guerreiros Vila Nova Vila Nova II Balocas Ortiga S. João Alto Arganil Salgueiros-Guilhado Serra do Mú Pestera Sarichioi  Wind farm  Adjacent  0.0  0%  farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm farm  Coll de la Garganta  Partially Within  0.0  0%  Wind farm Wind farm  Partially Within Partially Within  1.8 6.2  57% 55%  Avila  Wind farm  Adjacent  0.0  0%  Buenavista Serra Voltorera  Wind farm Wind farm  Adjacent Adjacent  0.0 0.0  0% 0%  Villoruebo  Wind farm  Partially Within  2.0  41%  Villamiel  Wind farm  Partially Within  4.9  75%  La Mallada  Wind farm  Partially Within  1.4  8%  Las Monjas  Wind farm  Partially Within  0.01  0%  Coll de la Garganta  Wind farm  Partially Within  0.00  0%  Tejonero (a) Tejonero (b)  Wind farm Wind farm  Partially Within Partially Within  0.04 0.03  0% 0%  Ávila  Wind farm  Adjacent  0.0  0%  Sierra de los Lagos Mostaza  Wind farm Wind farm  Adjacent Adjacent  0.0 0.0  0% 0%  Los Almeriques  Wind farm  Adjacent  0.0  0%  Suyal Serra Voltorera  Wind farm Wind farm  Adjacent Adjacent  0.0 0.0  0% 0%  Monseivane  Wind farm  Partially Within  17.3  98%  La Celaya  Wind farm  Partially Within  9.1  70%  Cerro del Conilete  Spain  Wind farm  Puntaza de Remolinos Planas de Pola  Wind farm Wind farm  Partially Within Adjacent  0.01 0.0  0% 0%  According to GRI requirements  Terrestrial Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial-Marine Terrestrial Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial Terrestrial Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial-Freshwater Terrestrial Terrestrial  Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 National protected area National protected area Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Regional park ZICO Regional park Natura 2000 Natura Natura Natura Natura Natura Natura Natura Natura  2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000 2000  Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 National protected area Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 National protected area Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000 Natura 2000  107  107   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  BIODIVERSITY_policy copia.pdf 1 15/11/2011 10:47:53  BIOD IVER SITY POLIC Y  With the implementation of its Biodiversity Policy, EDP Renewables (EDPR) is contributing to the world’s objective of reducing biodiversity loss due to human activity.  In particular, EDPR: Is aware of the sensivity of natural ecosystems and of the pressures that these are subject to, as well as of the intrinsic value of the initiatives aimed at protecting biodiversity; Has significant experience in minimizing the impact on biodiversity resulting from its activities; Wants to have an even more active role in the conservation of biodiversity and its promotion. EDPR deems biodiversity to be integrated in the management of its companies. The objective is to achieve an overall positive impact on biodiversity. C  M  Y  To that end, EDPR is committed to:  G4 EN12 - DESCRIPTION OF SIGNIFICANT IMPACTS OF ACTIVITIES, PRODUCTS, AND SERVICES ON BIODIVERSITY IN PROTECTED AREAS AND AREAS OF HIGH BIODIVERSITY VALUE OUTSIDE PROTECTED AREAS Potential environmental impacts are analyzed in detail in the environmental impact studies of the projects. Additionally feasible alternatives are assessed and preventive, corrective and compensation measures are determined.  CM  MY  CY  CMY  K  1. Integrate the biodiversity impact assessment in all phases of its activities: project design, construction, operation and dismantlement of its energy generation and distribution infrastructures; 2. Minimize any negative impact on biodiversity arising from its activities, and promote positive impacts. When significant negative impacts cannot be prevented, EDPR will pursue consensual compensation measures, which allows the achievement of a globally positive biodiversity balance sheet; 3. Contribute to broadening scientific knowledge on the diﬀerent aspects of biodiversity, in particular by supporting institutions selected in a transparent manner and in accordance with superior technical capability criteria; 4. Strengthen dialogue and partnerships on biodiversity issues with public or private entities; 5. Regularly and transparently report on its performance in relation to biodiversity, under the revision of independent bodies, and promote regular consulation to the diﬀerent stakeholders, on this issue.  Approved by the Executive Committee, January 2011  EDPR Biodiversity Policy, available at www.edpr.com  The company has defined general procedures in its Environmental Management System to prevent, correct or compensate impacts in the environment. In addition, efforts are intensified with specific monitoring procedures in the small number of sites located inside or close to protected areas. For additional information, visit our environmental information on the sustainability section our • website, www.edpr.com  G4 EU13 - BIODIVERSITY OF OFFSET HABITATS COMPARED TO THE BIODIVERSITY OF THE AFFECTED AREAS In the small number of sites located inside or close to protected areas, we intensify our efforts with specific monitoring procedures, as defined in our Environmental Management System. For additional information, visit our environmental information on the sustainability section our • website, www.edpr.com  G4 EN13 - HABITATS PROTECTED OR RESTORED Potential environmental impacts are analyzed in detail in the environmental impact studies of the projects.  After the construction period, it is our duty to return the site to its initial state. Therefore, we perform morphological restoration and reseeding works. In 2016, almost 63 ha of affected land were restored. The Castilla y León Natural Heritage Foundation is linked to the Castilla y León Regional Government and seeks to promote, maintain and manage the natural heritage of the region of Castilla y León. EDPR, the EDP Foundation and the Castilla y León Natural Heritage Foundation signed a cooperation agreement in December 2014 to work together on a series of environmental initiatives aimed at protecting the red kite. The agreement finalized in December 2016 following a total investment of €204,600, which allowed for a series of measures to be put in place: • Measures aimed at enhancing knowledge of red kite biology, including radiocollaring birds of different ages, installing a video camera in a red kite nest and tracking red kite populations in low-density areas. • Measures to improve food sources for the red kite, including advice to formers in low-density areas on the placement of carrion to improve trophic resources, the creation of specific feeding points with photo-trap monitoring and improvements to the dunghill at the Las Batuecas – Sierra de Francia national park. • Measures designed to reduce unnatural red kite deaths, analysing poisonings and incidences with wind farms and electrical infrastructure.  The company plans to continue to work with the Castilla y León Natural Heritage Foundation in 2017 through a new cooperative agreement.  108 108   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  G4 EN15 - DIRECT GREENHOUSE GAS (GHG) EMISSIONS (SCOPE 1)  CO2 eq emitted in 2016 (k tons)  EDPR’s Scope 1 emissions represent 2,108 tons of CO2 equivalent. 1,904 tones are emitted by transportation related to our windfarms operation, 179 tones by gas consumption in our offices and the rest of it is related to SF6.  0.02 7.37  Part of the equipment used for electricity generation purposes contains SF6 gases and during 2016 we registered emissions of 1 kg of this gas, which is equivalent almost to 25t CO2 eq. Note: Emissions were estimated according to GHG Protocol (including official sources such as IPCC or the U.S Department of Energy)  G4 EN16 - ENERGY INDIRECT GREENHOUSE GAS (GHG) EMISSIONS (SCOPE 2) EDPR’s CO2 indirect emissions represent 8,655 tons, 8,489 tons driven by  8.49 0.34  Wind Farms Energy Consumption Offices Energy Consumption Employees transportation SF6  electricity consumption by the wind farms and solar plants and 166 tons electricity consumption by the offices. In 2016, 100% of the emissions related to electricity consumption in windfarms and offices in Spain and US have been compensated by the certifications of origin and RECs obtained from our renewable energy generation. As a result, there is a  CO2 eq emitted in 2015 (k tons)  reduction in the reported emissions year on year. Note 1: The emission factors used are based on the following sources: Portugal - EDP, Turbogás, Pego, Rede Eléctrica Nacional (REN), and Entidade Reguladora dos Serviços Energéticos (ERSE); Spain – Red Eléctrica de España (REE); Brazil - Ministry of Science and Technology - SIN (National Interconnected System); USA - Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated Database (eGRID) for each state emission factor; Other European Countries - CERA, Global Insight.  6.8  0.4  1.1  Note 2: Electricity consumption emissions were calculated with the global emission factors of each country and state within the US.  G4 EN17 – OTHER INDIRECT GREENHOUSE GAS (GHG) EMISSIONS (SCOPE 3)  24.9  Our work requires our employees to travel and commute. Based on our estimates,  Wind Farms Energy Consumption  the transportation used by our employees accounted for a total of 5,470 tons of  Offices Energy Consumption  CO2 emissions.  Employees transportation SF6  Note: Emissions were estimated according to GHG Protocol, by following the DEFRA standard. Employee commuting emissions were calculated from data collected in a survey to all employees.  !"#$%&'&(% %  109  109   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Even though our activity inherently implies the reduction GHG emissions, EDPR goes one-step forward compensating 100% of the emissions related to grid connection of our windfarms and offices in Spain and US.  G4 EN19 - REDUCTION OF GREENHOUSE GAS (GHG) EMISSIONS Our core business activity inherently implies the reduction GHG emissions. Wind and solar energy has zero carbon emissions, contributing to the world’s fight against climate change and does not produce harmful SOx, NOx, or mercury emissions, protecting valuable air and water resources. We estimated that our activities avoided the emission of 20,078 thousand tons of CO2. Our emissions represent 0.1% of the total amount of emissions avoided and 53% of our total emissions are from the necessary electricity consumption by the wind farms. Even though our activity is based on the clean energy generation, we are conscious about promoting a culture of rational use of resources. During 2016, we continued promoting initiatives that foster environmental best practices in our offices. In 2016, 100% of the emissions related to electricity consumption in windfarms and offices in Spain and US have been compensated by the certifications of origin and RECs obtained from our renewable energy generation. As a result, there is a reduction in the reported emissions year on year. Note: To calculate the emissions avoidance, the energy generation has been multiplied by the CO2 eq emission factors of each country and state within the US. We considered the emission factor of just fossil fuel energy, as we considered that by increasing the generation of renewable energy, we are displacing these technologies, while other renewable technologies and nuclear plants will continue with its quota of generation.  G4 EN23 - TOTAL WEIGHT OF WASTE BY TYPE AND DISPOSAL METHOD The main contribution to the hazardous waste produced by wind farms is related to oil and oil-related wastes such as oil filters or oil containers, used mainly for lubrication of the turbines. The consumption of this oil is based on certain predefined replacement time frequencies (between 2 and 5 years, based on the component, oil type and manufacturer). During 2016, the recovery rate was 87% impacted by a significant spill with a volume of 65 metric tons of soil contaminated. Excluding this fact the recovery rate would have been 97% which certifies that the company has been actively working to improve the recycling rate of its hazardous wastes, through authorized waste haulers. As a reminder, the increase in hazardous wastes in 2015 was mainly due to the contamined soil driven by a significant spill. This soil was removed and fully restored. The increase in non-hazardous wastes in 2015 was driven by metals and glassfiber from 2 nacelles burned. These metals where fully recovered. On the basis of these pick values during the previous year, both hazardous and nonhazardous wastes in 2016 have decreased.  110 110   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  The following table summarizes the amount wastes generated per GWh in our facilities and the rate of recycling.The following table summarizes the amount wastes generated:  2016  2015  (%)  Total waste (kg/GWh)  48.8  72.8  -33%  Total hazardous waste (kg/GWh)  26.4  32.7  -19%  %of hazardous waste recovered  87%  73%  18%  2016  2015  1,195  1,556  647  700  -7%  84  186  -55%  563  514  10%  Waste generated by EDPR  Waste generated by EDPR  1  (%)  1  Total waste (t) Total hazardous wastes (t) Total hazardous waste disposed (t) Total hazardous waste recovered (t) Total non-hazardous wastes (t)  -23%  547  856  -36%  Total non-hazardous waste disposed (t)  227  608  -63%  Total non-hazardous waste recovered (t)  320  248  29%  Annual fluctuations in hazardous waste generated are heavily dependent on the pluri-annual oil replacement programs above mentioned. Non-hazardous wastes generated by the company include metals, plastics, paper or domestic garbage which is recycled in their vast majority. Note 1: In Europe, the method of disposal has been indicated by the waste hauler, while in the US the disposal method has been determined by the organizational standards of the waste hauler. Note 2: For the purposes of this report, all wastes have been classified as Hazardous or Non-hazardous according to European Waste Catalogue; however, in each country where EDPR has a geographic presence, each wind farm is required to adhere to national law by following company procedures for handling, labelling, and storage of wastes to ensure compliance. In cases, like in the United States, when our operations generate small quantities of substances which fall into additionally-regulated categories such as used oils and universal wastes–we follow strict standards for handling and disposal of these waste types to ensure we remain compliant with all applicable laws.  111  111   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  G4 EN24 - TOTAL NUMBER AND VOLUME OF SIGNIFICANT SPILLS EDPR performs regular environmental drills to guarantee that our employees are familiar with the risks and have received the appropriate training to prevent and act, if necessary.  Given our activity and our locations, oil spills and fires are the major environmental risks the company faces. The Environmental Management System is designed and implemented to prevent emergency situations from happening. But in case they happen, the system covers the identification and management of these, including the near-miss situations. EDPR defines as significant spill the ones above 0.16 m3 that reached the ground. Additionally, EDPR registers near miss situations, when registered incident does not reach the category of significant spill. In 2016, we had 3 significant spills with a total volume of 0.61 m3 of oil spilled, and 1 incipient fire and 6 fires without environmental impact. All cases were properly managed: oil spills were confined early and contaminated soil was collected and managed. Additionally, 52 near miss were registered driven by small oil leaks that did not reach bare soil. EDPR performs regular environmental drills to guarantee that our employees are familiar with the risks and have received the appropriate training to prevent and act, if necessary.  G4 EN29 - MONETARY VALUE OF SIGNIFICANT FINES AND TOTAL NUMBER OF NON-MONETARY SANCTIONS FOR NONCOMPLIANCE WITH ENVIRONMENTAL LAWS AND REGULATIONS During 2016, the company did not receive any penalty for non-compliance with environmental laws and regulations.  G4 EN30 - SIGNIFICANT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF TRANSPORTING PRODUCTS AND OTHER GOODS AND MATERIALS USED FOR THE ORGANIZATION'S OPERATIONS, AND TRANSPORTING MEMBERS OF THE WORKFORCE The main environmental impact was from employees traveling and commuting for business activities. For additional information about our emissions registered due to employees’ transportation, please • refer to the EN15 Indicator.  G4 EN31 - TOTAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION EXPENDITURES AND INVESTMENTS BY TYPE 3.3 million euros were invested and 5.7 million euros expended in environmental related activities.  In 2016, 3.3 million euros were invested and 5.7 million euros were expended in environmental related activities (includes personnel costs). For additional information about environmental protection expenditures and investments, please refer • to Note 40 in our Financial Statements.  G4 EN32 - PERCENTAGE OF NEW SUPPLIERS THAT WERE SCREENED USING ENVIRONMENTAL CRITERIA EDPR´s Environment and Biodiversity Policies reflect a responsible management of the environment along the whole value chain. According to these policies, EDPR  112 112   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  is committed to ensure that everyone involved, including suppliers, has the necessary, adequate skills for the purpose. The suppliers of EDPR shall adopt all necessary measures to ensure strict compliance with all applicable environmental regulations as well as EDPR´s Environment and Biodiversity Policies, internal norms, procedures and systems in place as regards to environmental management. EDPR has implemented, for all its wind farms in operation, an Environmental Management System (EMS) developed according to the international standard ISO 14001:2004. EDPR´s suppliers shall know and understand the EMS and ensure the full compliance with the procedures set. Supplier shall make the EMS available to its employees and subcontractors. EDPR’s critical suppliers (defined as per EDP formal corporate standard methodology) in Corporate, Europe and Brazil and in North America that had environmental systems: 88% of EDPR’s critical suppliers had environmental systems. •  For further information please refer to Suppliers Section.  G4 EN33 - SIGNIFICANT ACTUAL AND POTENTIAL NEGATIVE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN AND ACTIONS TAKEN In 2015, EDPR carried out a study to characterize its Supply Chain, including the analysis of the exposure to economic, social and environmental risks. This analysis was performed using ESCHER (Efficient Supply Chain Economic and Environmental Reporting) methodology developed by PwC. For the ESCHER calculation routine PwC used EDP Group 2014 data. The study allowed EDPR to determine the following results: 300* thousand ton GHG emissions associated to EDPR’s direct and indirect Supply Chain, 5%* of which related to direct suppliers. Through this study, EDPR aims to identify areas where should focus its improvement activities in order to significantly reduce its exposure to risk and optimize impacts. Note: Analysis performed by PwC using ESCHER (Efficient Supply Chain Economic and Environmental Reporting) tool, based on 2014 purchasing data. This study is still representative of EDPR reality and companies in the sector perform these studies every 2/3 years. Data presented in this chapter resulting from this study is marked with an *.  •  For further information please refer to Suppliers Section.  G4 EN34 - NUMBER OF GRIEVANCES ABOUT ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS FILED, ADDRESSED, AND RESOLVED THROUGH FORMAL GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS EDPR has no knowledge of any environmental formal grievance recorded during 2016 in any of its grievance channels.  113  113   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  4.4. Social Performance 4.4.1. LABOR PRACTICES AND DECENT WORK  G4 DISCLOUSURE ON MANAGEMENT APPROACH  1,083 employees from  33 nationalities.  EDPR's growth in recent years has created a new labor environment that is home to three different generations, a landscape in which it is vital for the company to be able to adapt to the changing business realities in the markets where we operate. We offer a customized employee value proposition based on development, transparency and flexibility, which allows us to attract and retain talent, as well as ensure the ongoing growth and development of our employees in order to have team-oriented people capable of adjusting to the ever-changing working environment. Development: EDPR is committed to the development of its employees, offering them an attractive professional career and aligning their capabilities and skills with the current and future needs of the company. The growth and development of the Group's business has led EDPR to invest in people with potential, who can contribute to the creation of value. Our objective is to attract talented people and to create opportunities for current employees through mobility and development actions in order to boost the potential of our employees. The HR strategy supports different initiatives to give them visibility and foster their professional development inside the company. The cornerstones of development at EDPR are mobility, training and Development Programs and Renewable Energy School. Transparency: At EDPR, we strive to attract, integrate and develop our professionals who seek to excel in their work in order to position the company as the "the first choice for employees" in the labor market. Flexibility: As part of our value proposition at EDPR, we offer a competitive remuneration package, aligned with the best practices in the market. In addition, we understand the importance of maintaining a work-life balance. It is a set of initiatives to promote a positive working environment in which employees can advance in their professional career and give their best. We believe that WLB must be a shared responsibility. We seek to constantly improve our WLB measures and provide the most suitable benefits to employees. In order to improve company's people management performance, EDP launches every two years the Organizational Climate Study. This study is a strategic Human Resources tool and one of the widest channels we have for collecting our employees’ feedback on the company's people management performance In addition to these three pillars, guaranteeing the health, safety and well-being of our employees is top priority at EDPR. This stern commitment is supported by our Health and Safety policies and initiatives, as well as, a strong track record. EDPR has a zero accidents goal stated in our Health & Safety policy. Note: WLB (Work Life Balance)  •  114 114  For additional information on our Human Resources strategy, please refer to the Employees Section.   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  G4 10 - TOTAL WORKFORCE BY EMPLOYMENT TYPE, EMPLOYMENT CONTRACT, AND REGION. In 2016, EDPR had 1,083 employees. 20% worked at EDPR holding, 41% in the European Platform, 36% in the North American Platform and 3% in Brazil.  Workforce Breakdown  2016  % Female  2015  % Female  1,083  33%  1,018  32%  Full time  1,050  31%  996  30%  Part time  33  94%  22  100%  Permanent  1,066  33%  1,001  32%  Temporary  17  24%  17  35%  Total  By Employment type:  By Employment Contract:  20% Europe  41% North America  By Country: Spain  EDPR Holding  373  34%  359  33%  Portugal  72  10%  62  10%  France  53  38%  48  31%  2  0%  2  0%  Poland  38  37%  40  30%  Romania  32  38%  33  36%  Italy  23  35%  22  36%  UK  34  47%  37  43%  410  33%  373  33%  5  0%  5  0%  34  29%  32  25%  7  29%  5  36%  20%  Belgium  USA Canada Brazil Mexico  Brazil  3%  The average number of contractors’ workers during the period has been 806 in Europe, 1,441 in North America and 98 in Brazil.  G4 LA1 - TOTAL NUMBER AND RATE OF EMPLOYEE TURNOVER BY AGE GROUP, GENDER, AND REGION Throughout the year, EDPR hired 158 employees while 93 are no longer with the company, resulting in a turnover ratio of 12%, which is slightly lower than the previous year.  115  115   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Employee Turnover  Turnover  New Hires  Departures  158  93  Less than 30 years old  73  26  23%  Between 30 and 39 years old  65  37  10%  Over 40 years old  20  30  Total  0  12%  By Age Group:  7%  0  By Gender: Female Male  29  49  21  10%  109  72  12%  40  By Country:  13  Spain  23  10  Portugal  11  2  9%  France  12  7  18%  Belgium  0  0  0%  Poland  4  6  13%  Romania  3  3  9%  Italy  2  0  4%  4%  1  3  6%  92  58  18%  Canada  1  0  10%  Brazil  5  2  10%  Mexico  4  0  29%  UK USA  G4 EU17 - DAYS WORKED BY CONTRACTOR AND SUBCONTRACTOR EMPLOYEES INVOLVED IN CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES Contractors involved in construction, operation and maintenance activities worked 575,403 days during 2016.  G4 EU18 - PERCENTAGE OF CONTRACTOR AND SUBCONTRACTOR EMPLOYEES THAT HAVE UNDERGONE RELEVANT HEALTH AND SAFETY TRAINING 2,345 contractors involved in construction and operation and maintenance activities during 2016.  As an integral part of our health & safety strategy, we conduct several training courses and risk assessment activities according to the potential risks identified for each position within the company. We are equally concerned with the health and safety standard of our employees and contractors. To this extent our contractors are subject to a health and safety screening when they bid to work for our company. Once the contractor is selected, they are required to present proof of having completed the required training. 95% of contractors have undergone relevant health and safety training during 2016 given by EDPR. Nevertheless, is mandatory for the companies that work with EDPR to assure that all the contractors have undergone health and safety courses.  116 116   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  G4 LA2 - BENEFITS PROVIDED TO FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES THAT ARE NOT PROVIDED TO TEMPORARY OR PART-TIME EMPLOYEES, BY MAJOR OPERATIONS As a responsible employer we offer quality employment that can be balanced with personal life. The package of benefits provided to full-time employees does not differ from that offered to part-time employees, and generally it goes beyond  EDPR recognized with ESR certificate – Socially Responsible Company and ranked among the 50 best companies to work in Spain and Poland.  what is agreed in collective bargaining agreements. This benefits package includes medical insurance, life insurance, pension plan and conciliation measures.  G4 LA3 - RETURN TO WORK AND RETENTION RATES AFTER PARENTAL LEAVE, BY GENDER Parental leave  Maternal  Paternal  Return to work  15  15  30  Portugal  1  3  4  France  1  3  4  Belgium  0  1  1  Poland  3  2  5  Romania  0  2  2  Italy  0  1  1  UK  1  1  2  USA  6  13  19  Canada  0  0  0  Brazil  0  2  2  Mexico  0  0  0  27  43  70  Spain  Total  In 2016, 70 employees enjoyed a maternal or paternal leave. All returned but after that four of them extended their leave.  117  117   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  G4 EU15 - PERCENTAGE OF EMPLOYEES ELIGIBLE TO RETIRE IN THE NEXT 5 AND 10 YEARS BROKEN DOWN BY JOB CATEGORY AND BY REGION Employees eligible to retire  in 5 years  EDPR employees’ average age.  104  44  Directors  30  14  Specialist  52  18  Managers  8  5  Technicians  14  7  By Country:  38yr  By employment category:  in 10 years  104  44  Spain  28  10  Portugal  18  8  Poland  2  2  Italy  1  0  France  2  0  UK  1  0  Romania  2  0  49  23  1  1  USA Brazil  Note that the employees eligible to retire in the next 5 years is with 60 years reference and in the next 10 years with 57 years reference.  G4 11 - PERCENTAGE OF EMPLOYEES COVERED BY COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS From EDPR’s 1,083 employees, 21% were covered by collective bargaining agreements.  Employees covered by collective bargaining agreements  2016  %  Spain  48  13%  Portugal  72  100%  France  45  85%  Belgium  1  50%  Poland  0  0%  Romania  0  0%  23  100%  Italy UK  0  0%  USA  1  0%  Canada  0  0%  34  100%  Brazil Mexico Total  0  0%  224  21%  Collective bargaining agreements apply to all employees working under an employment relationship with and for the account of the some companies of EDPR group, regardless of the type of contract, the professional group into which they  118 118   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  are classified, their occupation or job. However, matters relating to the corporate organization itself, the laws of each country or even usage and custom in each country result in certain groups being expressly excluded from the scope of collective bargaining agreements. •  For further information please refer to the Employee relations Section.  G4 LA4 - MINIMUM NOTICE PERIOD(S) REGARDING SIGNIFICANT OPERATIONAL CHANGES, INCLUDING WHETHER IT IS SPECIFIED IN COLLECTIVE AGREEMENTS Per country case law, EDPR may have a minimum period which it must comply with for giving formal notice of organizational changes at the companies in the Group with an impact on employees. However, it is customary to communicate significant events to the affected groups in advance. As an employer in the United States, EDPR complies with the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification (WARN) Act Guide to Advance Notice of Closings and Layoffs.  G4 LA5 - PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL WORKFORCE REPRESENTED IN FORMAL JOINT MANAGEMENT-WORKER HEALTH AND SAFETY COMMITTEES THAT HELP MONITOR AND ADVISE ON OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY PROGRAMS A significant part of our organization plays a fundamental role in the implementation of our health and safety policy. The company created health and safety committees that collect information from different operational levels and involve employees in the definition and communication of a preventive plan. During 2016, 4.0% of our employees attended health and safety committee meetings, representing 62% of our workforce. All EDPR geographies have active health and safety committees in place.  119  119   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  G4 LA6 - RATES OF INJURY, OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES, LOST DAYS, AND ABSENTEEISM, AND NUMBER OF WORK-RELATED FATALITIES BY REGION EDPR did not record any fatal accidents during 2015 and 2016.  H&S Indicators (EDPR and contractors personnel)3  2016  2015  25  27  Europe  13  15  North Ameri a c  12  3  0  9  0  0  Europe  0  0  North Ameri a c  0  0  Brazil  0  0  1,124  881  Europe  820  735  North Ameri a c  304  57  0  89  4  5  Europe  5  5  North Ameri a c  3  1  Brazil  0  13  170  151  309  269  83  24  0  125  Numberof indu strial acciden ts  Brazil Numberof indu strial fatal acciden ts  Working days lost by acciden caused ts  Europe and US have lower H&S indicators due to more training hours and emergency plans both for staff and contractors.  Brazil 1 Injury Rate (IR):  Lost work day rate (LDR):2  Europe North Ameri a c Brazil 1  Injury Rate calculated as [# of accidents/Hours worked * 1,000,000]  2  Lost Work Day Rate calculated as [# of working days lost/Hours worked * 1,000,000]  3  Minor first aid injuries are not included and number of days is calculated as the number of calendar days  There have been only an accident with a woman involved, which took place in Italy, with a 10 days absence.  Number of Training Hours (#)  G4 LA9 - AVERAGE HOURS OF TRAINING PER YEAR PER EMPLOYEE BY EMPLOYEE CATEGORY Training Metrics  44,350  38,619  TrainingInves tmen (k€) t 38,619  2015  Numberof TrainingHour (#) s  44,350  2016 1,492  1,607  Numberof Attendan ces (#)  9,024  6,459  • For a complete description of our Training and Human Resources strategy, please refer to the Employees Section.  2016  120 120  2015   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  G4 LA10 - PROGRAMS FOR SKILLS MANAGEMENT AND LIFELONG LEARNING THAT SUPPORT THE CONTINUED EMPLOYABILITY OF EMPLOYEES AND ASSIST THEM IN MANAGING CAREER ENDINGS We strive to offer our total workforce with opportunities to develop professionally and assume new roles to reach the goals of the company. Employees are encouraged to take advantage of the functional and geographic mobility opportunities. •  For a complete description of our Training and Human Resources strategy, please refer to the Employees Section.  G4 LA11 - PERCENTAGE OF EMPLOYEES RECEIVING REGULAR PERFORMANCE AND CAREER DEVELOPMENT REVIEWS, BY GENDER All of EDPR’s employees, regardless of their professional category, are evaluated every two years to determine their development potential by providing the most suitable training. EDPR creates tailored development plan to address specific needs. Moreover, EDPR offers the possibility to all employees to define a Personal Development Plan. This plan is very effective tool that enable us to structure training actions for the candidate aimed at widening their abilities and expertise since it requires a reflection upon the results of their skills assessment and identify  Our Code of Ethics contains specific clauses of non-discrimination and equal opportunities in line with the company’s culture of diversity.  the individual's strong points and areas where he can improve, taking into account the employee's development level, as well as the teamwork and organizational strategy. The Personal Development Plans (PDIs) launched in 2015 were reviewed in 2016, testament to our culture of continuous feedback and ongoing improvement. These are voluntary plans, agreed between manager and employee. The potential assessment process is independent from performance appraisal and is based on a 360 degree evaluation model which considers feedback from oneself, peers, subordinates and the manager.  “EDPR undertakes to ensure that its labor policies and procedures prevent unjustified discrimination and different treatment on the basis of ethnic or social origin, gender, sexual orientation, age, creed, marital status, disability, political orientation, opinion, birthplace  G4 LA12 - COMPOSITION OF GOVERNANCE BODIES AND BREAKDOWN OF EMPLOYEES PER EMPLOYEE CATEGORY ACCORDING TO GENDER, AGE GROUP, MINORITY GROUP MEMBERSHIP, AND OTHER INDICATORS OF DIVERSITY •  or trade union membership.” Principles of Action – Code of Ethics  A detailed description of the governance bodies can be found at the Corporate Governance Chapter of this report, Annex - Biographies. Please refer to LA1 and LA13 to employees related information.  121  121   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  G4 LA13 - RATIO OF BASIC SALARY OF MEN TO WOMEN BY EMPLOYEE CATEGORY M/F Salary Ratio  M/F Salary  Board Directors (non executive)  n/a  Directors  111%  Specialist  108%  Managers  106%  Technicians  97%  n/a: no women in these categories.  G4 LA14 - PERCENTAGE OF NEW SUPPLIERS THAT WERE SCREENED USING LABOR PRACTICES CRITERIA EDPR is governed by a strong sense of ethics and requires that its suppliers do not have conflicts with EDPR ethical standards. In this way, the acceptance of alignment with the spirit of EDPR’s Code of Ethics is required. As part of a supplier qualification process the supplier shall provide a written declaration of acceptance of the principles established in EDPR’s Code of Ethics. Additionally, the EDP Group and EDPR, have a Procurement Manual, which includes a chapter that guides each Purchasing Department to put sustainability principles into practice. Therefore when procuring and contracting goods and services EDPR appeals to all reasonable endeavors so that selected suppliers accept to comply with the UN Global Compact’s ten principles in the areas of human rights, labor, the environment and anti-corruption. Procedures to guarantee this accomplishment are defined. 100% of the EDPR critical suppliers (defined as per EDP formal corporate standard methodology) are aligned with Global Compact criteria and EDPR’s Code of Ethics. •  For further information please refer to Suppliers Section.  G4 LA15 - SIGNIFICANT ACTUAL AND POTENTIAL NEGATIVE IMPACTS FOR LABOR PRACTICES IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN AND ACTIONS TAKEN In 2016, 83% of EDPR’s critical suppliers (as defined as per EDP formal corporate standard methodology) had an Occupation Health & Safety System (OHS) in place. EDPR completed 13,156 hours of training on OHS to its suppliers, involving 165 companies and 2,227 workers. Additionally, EDPR carried out 1,052 audits to suppliers in the scope of OHS. •  122 122  For further information please refer to Suppliers Section.   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  G4 LA16 - NUMBER OF GRIEVANCES ABOUT LABOR PRACTICES FILED, ADDRESSED, AND RESOLVED THROUGH FORMAL GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS In 2016, EDPR did not record any contingencies related to labor practices.  EDPR did not record any incident related to labor practices or discrimination.  4.4.2. HUMAN RIGHTS G4 DISCLOUSURE ON MANAGEMENT APPROACH EDPR became a signatory to the UN Global Compact, an initiative of the United Nations launched in 2000 that defines guideline directives for businesses that opt to contribute to sustainable development. EDPR also has a Code of Ethics that contains specific clauses for the respect for human rights. In compliance with the Code, EDPR expresses its total opposition  EDP RENOVÁVEIS CODE OF ETHICS revision 17, February 2014  to forced or compulsory labor and recognizes that human rights should be considered fundamental and universal, based on conventions, treaties and international initiatives like the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Labor Organization and the UN Global Compact. EDPR is governed by a strong sense of ethics and requires that its suppliers do not have conflicts with EDPR ethical standards. In this way, the acceptance of alignment with the spirit of EDPR’s Code of Ethics is required. As part of a supplier qualification process the supplier shall provide a written declaration of acceptance of the principles established in EDPR’s Code of Ethics. Additionally, the EDP Group Sustainable Procurement Policy includes a reference to the promotion of respect for dignity and human rights and rejection of any form of forced labor or child labor, harassment, discrimination, abuse or other types of physical or psychological violence. Moreover, EDPR’s suppliers must know and accept by written the principles stablishes in EDPR’s Code Of Ethics and the UN Global Compact principles. •  For further information about the Code of Ethics and the Ethics Channel please visit the Section 5 Corporate Governance, C.II. Reporting Of Irregularities or visit our ethics information on the corporate governance section, in our website, www.edpr.com. Moreover, additional information is detailed in the Integrity and ethics section.  •  For further information regarding Suppliers please refer to Suppliers Section.  EDPR Code of Ethics , available at www.edpr.com  G4 HR1 - TOTAL NUMBER AND PERCENTAGE OF SIGNIFICANT INVESTMENT AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS THAT INCLUDE HUMAN RIGHTS CLAUSES OR THAT UNDERWENT HUMAN RIGHTS SCREENING EDPR has a Code of Ethics that contains specific clauses for the respect for human rights. Our Procurement Manual also includes a chapter to put the UN Global Compact principles into practice.  123  123   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  G4 HR2 - TOTAL HOURS OF EMPLOYEE TRAINING ON POLICIES AND PROCEDURES CONCERNING ASPECTS OF HUMAN RIGHTS THAT ARE RELEVANT TO OPERATIONS, INCLUDING THE PERCENTAGE OF EMPLOYEES TRAINED There is a strong commitment by the Company in relation to the dissemination and promotion of compliance with the Code of Ethics, which includes a Human Rights section, available to all employees through training, questionnaires, and open discussions of the findings. To this extent, from March to December 2016, EDP offered an online Ethics training (“Ética EDP") available to all employees of both Europe/Brazil and North America. This course achieved a major participation of around 900 EDPR employees.  G4 HR3 - TOTAL NUMBER OF INCIDENTS OF DISCRIMINATION AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS TAKEN In 2016, EDPR did not record any incidents of discrimination.  G4 HR4 - OPERATIONS IDENTIFIED IN WHICH THE RIGHT TO EXERCISE FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND COLLECTIVE BARGAINING MAY BE AT SIGNIFICANT RISK, AND ACTIONS TAKEN TO SUPPORT THESE RIGHTS In 2015, EDPR carried out a study to characterize its Supply Chain, based on an analysis of the exposure to economic, social and environmental risks. This analysis was performed using ESCHER (Efficient Supply Chain Economic and Environmental Reporting) methodology developed by PwC. For the ESCHER calculation routine PwC used EDP Group 2014 data related to suppliers. The study allowed EDPR to determine the following results: ~0%* EDPR’s direct suppliers identified in which the right to exercise freedom of association and collective bargaining may be at significant risk. Note: Analysis performed by PwC using ESCHER (Efficient Supply Chain Economic and Environmental  ETHICS PROCESS  Reporting) tool, based on 2014 purchasing data. This study is still representative of EDPR reality and companies in the sector perform these studies every 2/3 years. Data presented in this chapter resulting from this study is marked with an*.  Ethics Ombudsman  Ethics Committee  Board of Directors  •  For further information regarding Suppliers please refer to Suppliers Section.  G4 HR5 - OPERATIONS AND SUPPLIERS IDENTIFIED AS HAVING SIGNIFICANT RISK FOR INCIDENTS OF CHILD LABOR, AND MEASURES TAKEN TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE EFFECTIVE ABOLITION OF CHILD LABOR EDPR’s Code of Ethics has specific clauses against child or forced labor. The company did not identify any operation that could have a significant risk for  EDPR Ethical Process guarantees transparency and confidentiality.  incidents of child labor, forced and compulsory labor or indigenous rights. However, in 2015, EDPR carried out a study to characterize its Supply Chain, based on an analysis of the exposure to economic, social and environmental risks. This analysis was performed using ESCHER (Efficient Supply Chain Economic and Environmental Reporting) methodology developed by PwC. For the ESCHER calculation routine PwC used EDP Group 2014 data related to suppliers.  124 124   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  The study allowed EDPR to determine the following results: ~0%* EDPR’s direct suppliers identified as having significant risk for incidents of child labor. Note: Analysis performed by PwC using ESCHER (Efficient Supply Chain Economic and Environmental Reporting) tool, based on 2014 purchasing data. This study is still representative of EDPR reality and companies in the sector perform these studies every 2/3 years. Data presented in this chapter resulting from this study is marked with an *.  •  For further information about the Code of Ethics and the Ethics Channel please visit the Section 5 Corporate Governance, C.II. Reporting Of Irregularities or visit our ethics information on the corporate governance section, in our website, www.edpr.com. Moreover, additional information is detailed in the Integrity and ethics section.  •  For further information please refer to Suppliers Section.  G4 HR6 - OPERATIONS AND SUPPLIERS IDENTIFIED AS HAVING SIGNIFICANT RISK FOR INCIDENTS OF FORCED OR COMPULSORY LABOR, AND MEASURES TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF FORCED OR COMPULSORY LABOR EDPR’s Code of Ethics has specific clauses against child or forced labor. The company did not identify any operation that could have a significant risk for incidents of forced and compulsory labor or indigenous rights. However, in 2015, EDPR carried out a study to characterize its Supply Chain, based on an analysis of the exposure to economic, social and environmental risks. This analysis was performed using ESCHER (Efficient Supply Chain Economic and Environmental Reporting) methodology developed by PwC. For the ESCHER calculation routine PwC used EDP Group 2014 data related to suppliers. The study allowed EDPR to determine the following results: ~0%* EDPR’s direct suppliers identified as having significant risk for incidents of forced or compulsory labor. Note: Analysis performed by PwC using ESCHER (Efficient Supply Chain Economic and Environmental Reporting) tool, based on 2014 purchasing data. This study is still representative of EDPR reality and companies in the sector perform these studies every 2/3 years. Data presented in this chapter resulting from this study is marked with an *.  •  For further information about the Code of Ethics and the Ethics Channel please visit the Section 5 Corporate Governance, C.II. Reporting Of Irregularities or visit our ethics information on the corporate governance section, in our website, www.edpr.com. Moreover, additional information is detailed in the Integrity and ethics section.  •  For further information please refer to Suppliers Section.  125  125   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  G4 HR8 - TOTAL NUMBER OF INCIDENTS OF VIOLATIONS INVOLVING RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES AND ACTIONS TAKEN EDPR did not identify any operation that could have a significant risk for incidents with indigenous rights.  G4 HR9 - TOTAL NUMBER AND PERCENTAGE OF OPERATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN SUBJECT TO HUMAN RIGHTS REVIEWS OR IMPACT ASSESSMENTS EDPR has renewable plants in operation in 11 countries and is present in 12 countries, all of which are within the scope of the Code of Ethics premises and regulation.  G4 HR10 - PERCENTAGE OF NEW SUPPLIERS THAT WERE SCREENED USING HUMAN RIGHTS CRITERIA EDPR is governed by a strong sense of ethics and requires that its suppliers do not have conflicts with EDPR ethical standards. In this way, the acceptance of alignment with the spirit of EDPR’s Code of Ethics is required. As part of a supplier qualification process the supplier shall provide a written declaration of acceptance of the principles established in EDPR’s Code of Ethics. Additionally, the EDP Group and EDPR, has a Procurement Manual, which includes a chapter that guides each Purchasing Department to put sustainability principles into practice. Therefore when procuring and contracting goods and services EDPR appeals to all reasonable endeavors so that selected suppliers accept to comply with the UN Global Compact’s ten principles in the areas of human rights, labor, the  environment  and  anti-corruption.  Procedures  to  guarantee  this  accomplishment are defined. 100% of the EDPR critical suppliers (defined as per EDP formal corporate standard methodology) are aligned with Global Compact criteria and EDPR’s Code of Ethics. •  For further information please refer to Suppliers Section.  G4 HR11 - SIGNIFICANT ACTUAL AND POTENTIAL NEGATIVE HUMAN RIGHTS IMPACTS IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN AND ACTIONS TAKEN In 2015, EDPR carried out a study to characterize its Supply Chain, based on an analysis of the exposure to economic, social and environmental risks. This analysis was performed using ESCHER (Efficient Supply Chain Economic and Environmental Reporting) methodology developed by PwC. For the ESCHER calculation routine PwC used EDP Group 2014 data related to suppliers. The study allowed EDPR to determine the following results: ~0%* EDPR’s direct suppliers identified as having significant risk for incidents of child labor, forced or compulsory labor, freedom of association Through this study, EDPRR aims to identify areas where should focus its improvement activities in order to significantly reduce its exposure to risk and optimize impacts.  126 126   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Note: Analysis performed by PwC using ESCHER (Efficient Supply Chain Economic and Environmental Reporting) tool, based on 2014 purchasing data. This study is still representative of EDPR reality and companies in the sector perform these studies every 2/3 years. Data presented in this chapter resulting from this study is marked with an *.  •  For further information please refer to Suppliers Section.  G4 HR12 - NUMBER OF GRIEVANCES RELATED TO HUMAN RIGHTS FILED, ADDRESSED, AND RESOLVED THROUGH FORMAL GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS  Distribution of EDPR Group's tax payments by country 1% 14%  In 2016, EDPR did not record any incidents related to human rights practices in any of its grievance channels. •  20%  Additional information on the Whistleblowing Channel and the Ethics Channel can be found at Section 5 Corporate Governance, C. II. Reporting Of Irregularities or visit our ethics information on the corporate governance section, in our website, www.edpr.com. Moreover, additional information is detailed in the Integrity and ethics Section.  €142m in 2016  36%  29%  4.4.3. SOCIETY  Spain  Portugal  Rest of Europe  Brazil  US + Canada  G4 DISCLOUSURE ON MANAGEMENT APPROACH Renewable energy technologies are viewed not only as tools for mitigating climate change, but are also increasingly recognized as investments that can provide direct and indirect economic advantages by reducing dependence on imported fuels (and hence, improving trade balances), enhancing local air quality and safety, advancing energy access and security, propelling economic development, Land leases and taxes are a large contribution to the yearly budget for the municipalities where it is present. In addition, EDPR devoted 1.1 million Euros in social projects to support education and community related activities and total tax contribution to the public finances amounts to €142m in year 2016. •  Additional information on the Communities Section of this report and in our website www.edpr.com  G4 SO1 - PERCENTAGE OF OPERATIONS WITH IMPLEMENTED LOCAL COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT, IMPACT ASSESSMENTS, AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS We are well aware of the impact that our activity has in the local communities  Distribution of EDPR Group's tax payments by tax type  9% 32% €142m in 2016  29%  where we develop our wind farms and how we can maximize those potential benefits for the company and the inhabitants of the surrounding areas through an open communication with our stakeholders. Therefore, we establish a  30%  relationship of trust and collaboration with the communities where we have presence from the very initial stages of our projects, organizing informative sessions, we hold open dialogs with these communities, to explain the benefits of wind energy. We also organize volunteering and sport activities to promote a  Corporate Income Tax  Energy Tax  Property & Land Taxes  Other Tributes  sustainable development of the society. Our business generates further indirect positive impacts in the areas where we are present, through local hiring and procurement and the development of infrastructures and the payment of taxes and rents. •  Additional information on the Communities Section of this report and in our website www.edpr.com  127  127   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  G4 SO2 - OPERATIONS WITH SIGNIFICANT ACTUAL OR POTENTIAL NEGATIVE IMPACTS ON LOCAL COMMUNITIES Wind farm energy is a long lasting economic development driver for the municipalities where it is present. EDPR performance of studies assessing the impact on the environment and the community before the construction, these studies include the most significant issues for the affected areas such as emissions, wastes, changes to land use, changes in landscape, health and safety impacts, affected economic activities, impacts on infrastructure, existence of historical and cultural heritage, presence of indigenous communities, and the need to displace local populations. During operation, grievance mechanisms are also available to ensure that suggestions or complaints are properly recorded and addressed. This allows us not only to solve the complaints but to introduce improvements in our processes. A good example is the way we handle the complaints related to possible interferences with TV signal. We have set a procedure involving the town halls to facilitate and speed up the collection of these complaints as soon as they arise, a proper analysis and communication with the plaintiff and a fast satisfactory resolution. EDPR has different programs in place to assess and manage the impact on communities, and to maximize the shared value of our projects. •  Additional information on the Communities Section of this report and in our website www.edpr.com  G4 SO3 - TOTAL NUMBER AND PERCENTAGE OF OPERATIONS ASSESSED FOR RISKS RELATED TO CORRUPTION AND THE SIGNIFICANT RISKS IDENTIFIED EDPR analyses all the new markets were enters operations through a Market overview. This study also evaluates the corruption risk. EDPR during 2015, implemented an Anti-Bribery Policy of application to all EDPR Group. This Anti-Corruption Policy involves a series of new procedures regarding the relationships of EDPR employees with external parties, namely the approval of certain actions regarding hospitality to and from external parties, charitable donations, and sponsorships.  Anti-Bribery Policy is available at www.edpr.com  Additional information on the Whistleblowing Channel and the Ethics Channel can be found at Section • 5 Corporate Governance, C. II. Reporting Of Irregularities or visit our ethics information on the corporate governance section, in our website, www.edpr.com. Moreover, additional information is detailed in the Integrity and ethics Section.  G4 SO4 - COMMUNICATION AND TRAINING ON ANTICORRUPTION POLICIES AND PROCEDURES There is a strong commitment by the Company in relation to the dissemination and promotion of compliance with the Code of ethics , which includes Bribery & Corruption section, available to all employees through training, questionnaires, and open discussions of the findings. To this extent, from March to December 2016, EDP offered an online Ethics training (“Ética EDP") available to all employees of both Europe/Brazil and North America. This course achieved a major participation of around 900 EDPR employees.  128  128   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  •  Additional information on the Whistleblowing Channel and the Ethics Channel can be found at Section 5 Corporate Governance, C. II. Reporting Of Irregularities or visit our ethics information on the corporate governance section, in our website, www.edpr.com. Moreover, additional information is detailed in the Integrity and ethics Section.  G4 SO5 - CONFIRMED INCIDENTS OF CORRUPTION AND ACTIONS TAKEN EDPR has no knowledge of any corruption-related incidents recorded during 2016. Moreover, the company has internal procedures to monitor compliance with the Code of Ethics and defines actions to be taken in case of incidents. •  Additional information on the Whistleblowing Channel and the Ethics Channel can be found at Section 5 Corporate Governance, C. II. Reporting Of Irregularities or visit our ethics information on the corporate governance section, in our website, www.edpr.com. Moreover, additional information is detailed in the Integrity and ethics Section.  G4 SO6 -TOTAL VALUE OF FINANCIAL AND IN-KIND CONTRIBUTIONS TO POLITICAL PARTIES, POLITICIANS, AND RELATED INSTITUTIONS BY COUNTRY EDPR made no contributions to political parties in 2016.  G4 SO7 - TOTAL NUMBER OF LEGAL ACTIONS FOR ANTICOMPETITIVE BEHAVIOUR, ANTI-TRUST, AND MONOPOLY PRACTICES AND THEIR OUTCOMES EDPR has no knowledge of any legal actions for anti-competitive behavior, antitrust or monopoly practices recorded during 2016.  G4 SO8 - MONETARY VALUE OF SIGNIFICANT FINES AND TOTAL NUMBER OF NON-MONETARY SANCTIONS FOR NONCOMPLIANCE WITH LAWS AND REGULATIONS During 2016, the company received a total penalty of 382,115 euros. More than half of the amount related to a legislation change that created an overlap of an area designated to public use with the layout of one of our wind farms. The rest is mainly tax- related.  G4 SO9 - PERCENTAGE OF NEW SUPPLIERS THAT WERE SCREENED USING CRITERIA FOR IMPACTS ON SOCIETY EDPR is governed by a strong sense of ethics and requires that its suppliers do not have conflicts with EDPR ethical standards. In this way, the acceptance of alignment with the spirit of EDPR’s Code of Ethics is required. As part of a supplier qualification process the supplier shall provide a written declaration of acceptance of the principles established in EDPR’s Code of Ethics.  EDPR carried out a study to characterize its Supply Chain, including the analysis of the exposure to economic, social and environmental risks.  Additionally, the EDP Group and EDPR, has a Procurement Manual, which includes a chapter that guides each Purchasing Department to put sustainability principles into practice. Therefore when procuring and contracting goods and services EDPR appeals to all reasonable endeavors so that selected suppliers accept to comply  129  129   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  with the UN Global Compact’s ten principles in the areas of human rights, labor, the  environment  and  anti-corruption.  Procedures  to  guarantee  this  accomplishment are defined. 100% of the EDPR critical suppliers (defined as per EDP formal corporate standard methodology) are aligned with Global Compact criteria and EDPR’s Code of Ethics. •  For further information please refer to Suppliers Section.  G4 SO10 - SIGNIFICANT ACTUAL AND POTENTIAL NEGATIVE IMPACTS ON SOCIETY IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN AND ACTIONS TAKEN In 2015, EDPR carried out a study to characterize its Supply Chain, based on an analysis of the exposure to economic, social and environmental risks. This analysis was performed using ESCHER (Efficient Supply Chain Economic and Environmental Reporting) methodology developed by PwC. For the ESCHER calculation routine PwC used EDP Group 2014 data related to suppliers. The study allowed EDPR to determine the following results: More than 20 000* employment associated to EDPR’s Supply Chain More than 735* Million EUR gross value added associated to EDPR’s Supply Chain Through this study, EDPR aims to identify areas where should focus its improvement activities in order to significantly reduce its exposure to risk and optimize impacts. Note: Analysis performed by PwC using ESCHER (Efficient Supply Chain Economic and Environmental Reporting) tool, based on 2014 purchasing data. This study is still representative of EDPR reality and companies in the sector perform these studies every 2/3 years. Data presented in this chapter resulting from this study is marked with an *.  •  Additional information on Suppliers Section.  G4 SO11 - NUMBER OF GRIEVANCES ABOUT IMPACTS ON SOCIETY FILED, ADDRESSED, AND RESOLVED THROUGH FORMAL GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS (G4-27) EDPR has registered 83 complains during 2016 regarding society impacts. 59 in France related to possible interferences with TV signal and 10 to noise. All of them with related cost corrective actions valuated in EUR 22,276. •  Additional information on the Whistleblowing Channel and the Ethics Channel can be found at Section 5 Corporate Governance, C. II. Reporting Of Irregularities or visit our ethics information on the corporate governance section, in our website, www.edpr.com. Moreover, additional information is detailed in the Integrity and ethics Section.  130 130   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  4.4.4. PRODUCT RESPONSIBILITY  G4 DISCLOUSURE ON MANAGEMENT APPROACH Our core business and health & safety initiatives are focused on the electricity generation and not in its final consumption.  G4 EU25 - NUMBER OF INJURIES AND FATALITIES TO THE PUBLIC INVOLVING COMPANY ASSETS, INCLUDING LEGAL JUDGMENTS, SETTLEMENTS AND PENDING LEGAL CASES OF DISEASES During 2016, EDPR did not identify injuries or fatalities to the public involving company assets.  131  131   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  4.5. Reporting Principles (G4-18, G4-20, G4-21, G425, G4-26, G4-27) This is the seventh year EDPR publishes an integrated report describing the company’s performance, with respect to the three pillars of sustainability: economic, environmental and social. Information is presented according to G4 guidelines of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) for Sustainability Reporting and provides also information on the additional electricity sector supplement indicators directly related to the company business, which is the power generation from renewable sources, basically wind. A full GRI G4 Content Index for the report can be found in our website www.edpr.com UNITED NATIONS GLOBAL COMPACT Global Compact is an initiative of the United Nations launched in 2000 that defines guideline directives for businesses that opt to contribute to sustainable development. EDPR has become signatory of this initiative and is committed to put these principles into practice, informing society of the progress it has achieved. In addition, the company has a Code of Ethics that contains specific clauses on the respect for human rights. In compliance with the Code, EDPR expresses its total opposition to forced or compulsory labor and recognizes that human rights should be considered fundamental and universal, based on conventions, treaties and international initiatives like the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Labor Organization and the Global Compact. Our Procurement Manual also includes a chapter that guides each Purchasing Department to put these principles into practice, therefore when procuring and contracting goods and services EDPR appeals to all reasonable endeavors so that selected suppliers accept to comply with the UN Global Compact’s ten principles in the areas of human rights, labor, the environment and anti-corruption. •  To learn more about the UN Global Compact, please visit www.unglobalcompact.org  GLOBAL REPORTING INITIATIVE The GRI guidelines define a set of indicators and recommendations to create a global standard for disclosing information concerning the three sustainability pillars: economic, environmental and social performance. A company’s adherence to these guidelines means that it concurs with the concept and practices of sustainability. The whole report, including environmental and social indicators contemplated by the GRI, was audited by KPMG. The GRI framework defines a list of principles to help organizations ensure that the content of the report is balanced and accurate. EDPR applied these principles as the basis for the 2016 Annual Report. •  To learn more about the GRI guidelines, please visit www.globalreporting.org  GRI COVERAGE This Annual Report follows G4 Guidelines in its accordance with Core Option and GRI Materiality Disclosures Service has verified that the General Standard Disclosures G4-17 to G4-27 are correctly located in both the GRI Content Index and in the text of the final report. Additionally, its content has been assured according to ISAE 3000 by KPMG.  MATERIALITY  SUSTAINABILITY CONTEXT This report is placed in the context of the  ACCURACY, CLARITY, COMPARABILITY AND  This report includes the relevant information  company strategy to contribute to the  RELIABILITY  for the company’s stakeholders, as derived  sustainable development of society,  The information presented follows the GRI  whenever possible .  guidelines aim to make information  from the materiality studies performed.  comparable, traceable, accurate and reliable.  STAKEHOLDER INCLUSIVENESS COMPLETENESS AND BALANCE The concerns and the feedback received from our stakeholders were taken into account during the report’s creation. For additional information about our stakeholders, please refer to The Company and Stakeholders Section or visit our website.  132 132  Unless otherwise stated, this report covers all the company’s subsidiaries and is presented in a balanced and objective perspective.  TIMELINESS The information presented in this report relates to FY2016. EDPR is committed to report sustainability information at least once a year. Additionally, sustainability information is reported in market reports.   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  4.6. External Checks 4.6.1. INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE REPORT  KPMG Asesores, S.L. Pº. de la Castellana, 259 C 28046 Madrid  Independent Assurance Report to the Management of EDP Renováveis, S.A. We performed a limited assurance review on the non-financial information contained in EDP Renováveis, S.A., (hereinafter EDP Renováveis) Annual Report for the year ended 31 December 2016 (hereinafter ʻthe Reportʼ). The information reviewed corresponds specifically to the GRI indicators described in chapters 03 Execution and 04 Sustainability. EDP Renováveis management is responsible for the preparation and presentation of the Report in accordance with the core option stated by the Sustainability Reporting Guidelines, GRI G4 version, of the Global Reporting Initiative as described in section 4.6.2 of the Report. The Report follows the Materiality Matters Check criteria, which had been confirmed by the Global Reporting Initiative. Management is also responsible for the information and assertions contained within the Report; for determining its objectives in respect of the selection and presentation of sustainable development performance, including the processes for determining the material issues and the key stakeholder groups; and for establishing and maintaining appropriate performance management and internal control systems from which the reported performance information is derived. Our responsibility is to carry out a limited assurance engagement and to express a conclusion based on the work performed. We conducted our engagement in accordance with International Standard on Assurance Engagements (ISAE) 3000, Assurance Engagements other than Audits or Reviews of Historical Financial Information, issued by the International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board and also in accordance with the guidance set out by the Instituto de Censores Jurados de Cuentas de España (ICJCE). These standards require that we plan and perform the engagement to obtain limited assurance about whether the Report is free from material misstatement. KPMG applies International Standard on Quality Control 1 and accordingly maintains a comprehensive system of quality control including documented policies and procedures regarding compliance with ethical requirements, professional standards and applicable legal and regulatory requirements. We have complied with the independence and other ethical requirements of the Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants issued by the Internal Ethics Standards Board for Accountants, which is founded on fundamental principles of integrity, objectivity, professional competence and due care, confidentiality and professional behavior. Our limited assurance engagement consisted of making enquiries of management and persons responsible for the preparation of information presented in the Report, and applying analytical and other evidence gathering procedures. These procedures included:  •  Verification of EDP Renovaveis processes for determining the material issues, and the participation of stakeholder groups therein.  •  Interviews with relevant staff at group level and selected business unit level concerning sustainability strategy and policies and corporate responsibility for material issues, and the implementation of these across the business.  •  Evaluation through interviews concerning the consistency of the description of the application of EDP Renovaveis policies and strategy on sustainability, governance, ethics and integrity.  KPMG Asesores S.L., a limited liability Spanish company and a member firm of the KPMG network of independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Cooperative (“KPMG International”), a Swiss entity.  Reg. Mer Madrid, T. 14.972, F. 53, Sec. 8 , H. M -249.480, Inscrip. 1.ª N.I.F. B-82498650  133   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  2  •  Risk analysis, including searching the media to identify material issues during the year covered by the Report.  •  Review of the consistency of information comparing General Standard Disclosures with internal systems and documentation.  •  Analysis of the processes of compiling and internal control over quantitative data reflected in the Report, regarding the reliability of the information, by using analytical procedures and review testing based on sampling.  •  Review of the application of the Global Reporting Initiative's G4 Sustainability Reporting Guidelines' requirements in accordance with the core option for preparing Reports.  •  Reading the information presented in the Report to determine whether it is in line with our overall knowledge of, and experience with, the sustainability performance of EDP Renovaveis.  •  Verification that the financial information reflected in the Report was audited by independent third parties.  Our multidisciplinary team included specialists in social, environmental and economic business aspects. The procedures performed in a limited assurance engagement vary in nature and timing from, and are less in extent than for, a reasonable assurance engagement. Consequently, the level of assurance obtained in a limited assurance engagement is lower than that of a reasonable assurance engagement. This report may not be taken as an auditor's report. Our conclusion has been formed on the basis of, and is subject to, the matters outlined in this Independent Review Report. We believe that the evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our conclusions. Based on the limited assurance procedures performed and the evidence obtained, as described above, nothing has come to our attention that causes us to believe that the information presented in the EDP Renovaveis Annual Report for the year ended 31 December 2016 is not prepared and presented, in all material respects, in accordance with the Sustainability Reporting Guidelines version 4.0 of the Global Reporting Initiative, as described in point G4-32 of the GRI Index, including the reliability of data, adequacy of the information presented and the absence of significant deviations and omissions. Under separate cover, we will provide EDP Renováveis management with an internal report outlining our complete findings and areas for improvement. In accordance with the terms of our engagement, this Independent Review Report has been prepared for EDP Renovaveis, S.A. in relation to its 2016 Annual Report and for no other purpose or in any other context. KPMG Asesores, S.L.  José Luis Blasco Vázquez 14 March 2017  134 134   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  4.6.2. GRI CONTENT INDEX IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE OPTION CORE  We are members of the GRI GOLD Community and support the mission of GRI to develop globally accepted sustainability reporting guidelines through a global, multi-stakeholder process. Additionally, this Annual Report follows G4 Guidelines in its accordance with Core Option and GRI Materiality Disclosures Service has verified that the General Standard Disclosures G4-17 to G4-27 are correctly located in both the GRI Content Index and in the text of the final report. A full GRI G4 Content Index for the report can be found in our website.  135    5 Corporate Governance  PART I – Information on Shareholders Structure, Organization and Corporate Governance A. Shareholders Structure B. Corporate Boards and Committees C. Internal Organization D. Remuneration E. Related-Party Transactions  141 145 164 182 189  PART II – Corporate Governance Assessment  194  Annex – Professional Qualifications and Biographies of the Members of the Board of Directors  199     ENERGY AS THE NEWART  16   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  5 Corporate Governance  PART I – INFORMATION ON SHAREHOLDER STRUCTURE, ORGANIZATION AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE A. Shareholders Structure I. CAPITAL STRUCTURE  1. CAPITAL STRUCTURE  EDP Renováveis, S.A. (hereinafter referred to as EDP Renováveis, EDPR or the Company) total share capital is, since its initial public offering (IPO) in June 2008, EUR 4,361,540,810 consisting of issued and fully paid 872,308,162 shares with nominal value of EUR 5.00 each. All the shares are part of a single class and series and are admitted to trading on the NYSE Euronext Lisbon regulated market. Codes and tickers of EDP Renováveis SA share: ISIN: .............................................. ES0127797019 LEI:.………………………..529900MUFAH07Q1TAX06 Bloomberg Ticker (NYSE Euronext Lisbon): .... EDPR PL Reuters RIC: ..............................................EDPR.LS  EDPR main shareholder is EDP – Energias de Portugal, S.A., through EDP – Energias de Portugal, S.A. - Sucursal en España (hereinafter referred as “EDP”), with 77.5% of share capital and voting rights. Excluding EDP Group, EDPR shareholders comprise more than 65,000 institutional and private investors spread across 23 countries with main focus in the United States and United Kingdom. Institutional Investors represent 92% of Company shareholders (ex-EDP Group), mainly investment funds and socially responsible investors (“SRI”), while Private Investors, mostly Portuguese, stand for 8%. For further information about EDPR shareholder structure please see chapter 1.3 Organization.  2. RESTRICTIONS TO THE TRANSFERABILITY OF SHARES EDPR’s Articles of Association have no restrictions on the transferability of shares.  3. OWN SHARES EDPR does not hold own shares.  4. CHANGE OF CONTROL EDPR has not adopted any measures designed to prevent successful takeover bids.  141  141   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  The Company has taken no defensive measures for cases of a change in control in its shareholder structure. EDPR has not entered into any agreements subject to the condition of a change in control of the Company, other than in accordance with normal practice. In the case of financing of certain wind farm projects, lenders have the right to approve change in control at the borrower if the later ceased to be controlled, directly or indirectly, by EDPR. In the case of guarantees provided by EDP Group companies, if EDP, directly or indirectly ceases to have the majority of EDPR then EDP is no longer obliged to provide such services or guarantees. The relevant subsidiaries will be obliged to provide for the cancellation or replacement of all outstanding guarantees within sixty (60) days of the change of control event. In the cases of intra-group services agreements and according to the Framework Agreement signed between EDP Renováveis S.A. and EDP Energias de Portugal S.A., the contracts will maintain their full force as long as EDP maintains its share capital above 50% or the right to exercise directly or indirectly more than 50% of voting rights on EDPR’s share capital. Even if the share capital of EDP or its voting rights are below 50%, the contract is maintained as long as more than half of the Members of the Board or of EDPR’s Executive Committee are elected through an EDP proposal.  5. SPECIAL AGREEMENTS REGIME EDPR does not have a system for the renewal or withdrawal of counter measures particularly to provide for the restriction on the number of votes capable of being held or exercised by only one shareholder individually or together with other shareholders.  6. SHAREHOLDERS AGREEMENTS The Company is not aware of any shareholders’ agreement that may result in restrictions on the transfer of securities or voting rights.  II. SHAREHOLDINGS AND BONDS HELD  7. QUALIFIED HOLDINGS Qualifying holdings in EDPR are subject to the Spanish Law, which regulates the criteria and thresholds of the shareholder’s holdings. Pursuant to the Article 125, of the Spanish Securities Market Law (“Ley de Mercado de Valores”) EDPR is providing the following information on qualifying holdings and their voting rights as of December 31st 2016. As of December 31st 2016, the following qualified holdings were identified: Shareholder  # Shares  % Capital  % Voting Rights  EDP – Energias de Portugal, S.A. – Sucursal en España  676,283,856  77.5%  77.5%  EDP detains 77.5% of EDPR capital and voting rights, through EDP – Energias de Portugal, S.A. – Sucursal en España. MFS Investment Management  27,149,038  3.1%  3.1% 24th  MFS Investment Management is an American based active and global asset manager. In September 2013, MFS Investment Management reported to Comisión Nacional del Mercado de Valores (CNMV) its indirect qualified position as collective investment institution. Total Qualified Holdings  703,432,894  80.6%  80.6%  As of December 31st 2016, EDPR’s shareholder structure consisted of a total qualified shareholding of 80.6%, with EDP and MFS Investment Management detaining 77.5% and 3.1% of EDPR capital respectively.  142 142   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  8. SHARES HELD BY THE MEMBERS OF THE MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISORY BOARDS The table below reflects the number of EDPR shares owned, directly or indirectly, by the Board Members, as of December 31st 2016. The transactions of shares by EDPR’s Board Members are reported to the regulatory and supervisory entities (CMVM – Comissão de Mercado de Valores Mobiliários – in Portugal and CNMV – Comisión Nacional del Mercado de Valores – in Spain).  Board Member  Transactions in 2016 Type  Date  # Shares as of Dec. 31st 2016  #Shares  Price  António Mexia  -  -  -  -  Direct 4,200  Indirect -  Total 4,200  João Manso Neto  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Nuno Alves  -  -  -  -  5,000  -  5,000  Miguel Dias Amaro  -  -  -  -  25  -  25  João Paulo Costeira  -  -  -  -  3,000  -  3,000  Gabriel Alonso  -  -  -  -  26,503  -  26,503  João Manuel de Mello Franco  -  -  -  -  380  -  380  Jorge Santos  -  -  -  -  200  -  200  João Lopes Raimundo  -  -  -  -  170  670  840  António Nogueira Leite  -  -  -  -  100  -  100  Manuel Menéndez Menéndez  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Gilles August  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  José Ferreira Machado  -  -  -  -  630  -  630  Acácio Piloto  -  -  -  -  300  -  300  Francisca Guedes de Oliveira  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Allan J. Katz  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Francisco Seixas da Costa  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  9. POWERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS The Board of Directors is vested with the broadest powers to manage, supervise and govern the Company, with no other limitations besides the powers expressly granted to the exclusive jurisdiction of General Meetings in Article 13 of the Company’s Articles of Association or in the applicable law. Within this context, the Board is empowered to: •  Acquire on a lucrative or onerous title basis personal and real property, rights, shares and interests that may suit the Company;  •  Sell and mortgage or charge personal and real property, rights, shares and interests of the Company and cancel mortgages and other rights in rem;  •  Negotiate and conclude as many loans and credit operations as it may deem appropriate;  •  Enter and formalize all sorts of acts or contracts with public entities or private persons;  •  Exercise civil and criminal actions and all further actions to be undertaken by the Company, representing it before governmental officers, authorities, corporations, governing, administrative, administrative-economic, administrative-litigation and judicial courts, labor courts and the labor sections (“Juzgados de lo Social y Salas de lo Social”) of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts of the Autonomous Communities, with no limitations whatsoever, including before the European Court of Justice, and in general before the Government, in all its levels and hierarchies; to intervene or promote, follow and terminate, through all procedures and instances, the processes, court sections or proceedings; to accept decisions, to file any kind of appeal, including the cassation and other extraordinary appeals, to discontinue or confess, to agree an early termination of a proceeding, to submit litigious questions to arbitration judges, and to carry out all sorts of notices and requirements and to grant a Power of Attorney to Court Representatives and other representatives, with the case-related powers  143  143   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  and the powers which are usually granted to litigation cases and all the special powers applicable, and to revoke such powers;   Agree the allotment of dividends;    Call and convene General Meetings and submit to them the proposals that it deem appropriate;    Direct the Company and organize its operations and exploitations by acknowledging the course of the Company businesses and operations, managing the investment of funds, making extraordinary depreciations of bonds in circulation and realizing anything that it is considered appropriate to obtain maximum gains towards the object of the Company;    Freely appoint and dismiss Directors and all the Company’s technical and administrative personnel, defining their office and their retribution;    Agree any changes of the registered office’s address within the same borough;    Incorporate under the law all sorts of legal persons; contribute and assign all sorts of assets and rights, as well as entering merger and cooperation agreements, association, grouping and temporary union agreements between companies or businesses and joint property agreements and agreeing their alteration, transformation and termination;    All further powers expressly granted to the Board in these Articles or in the applicable law. This list is without limitations and has a mere indicative nature.  As of April 9th 2015, the General Shareholders’ Meeting approved the delegation to the Board of Directors of the power to issue in one or more occasions any:   Fixed income securities or other debt instruments of analogous nature, as well as    Fixed income securities or other type of securities (warrants included) convertible or exchangeable into EDP Renováveis, S.A. shares, or that recognize, at the Board of Directors’ discretion, the right of subscription or acquisition of shares of EDP Renováveis, S.A., or of other companies, up to a maximum amount of three hundred million Euros (EUR 300,000,000) or its equivalent in other currency.  As part of such delegation, the General Shareholder’s Meeting delegated into the Board of Directors the power to increase the share capital up to the necessary amount to execute the power above. Additionally, it was also approved to authorize the Board of Directors for the acquisition of own shares by the Company and/or the affiliate companies. These delegations may be exercised by the Board of Directors within a period of five (5) years since the proposal was approved, and within the limits provided under the law and the By-Laws. Additionally, the General Shareholders’ Meeting may also delegate to the Board of Directors the power to implement an adopted decision to increase the share capital, indicating the date or dates of its implementation and establishing any other conditions that have not been specified by the General Shareholders’ Meeting. The Board of Directors may use this delegation wholly or partially and may also decide not to perform it in consideration of the conditions of the Company, the market, or any particularly relevant events or circumstances that justify said decision, of which the General Shareholders’ Meeting must be informed at the end of the time limit or limits for performing it.  10. SIGNIFICANT BUSINESS RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN THE HOLDERS OF QUALIFYING HOLDINGS AND THE COMPANY Information on any significant business relationships between the holders of qualifying holdings and the Company is described on topic 90 of this Report.  144 144   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  B. Corporate Boards and Committees I. GENERAL MEETING  A. COMPOSITION OF THE PRESIDING BOARD OF THE GENERAL MEETING  11. BOARD OF THE GENERAL SHAREHOLDERS’ MEETING The Members of the Board of the General Shareholders’ Meeting are its Chairman, the Chairman of the Board of Directors or his substitute, the other Directors and the Secretary of the Board of Directors. The Chairman of the General Shareholders’ Meeting is José António de Melo Pinto Ribeiro, who was elected on the General Meeting of April 8th, 2014 for a three-year term. The Chairman of the Board of Directors is António Mexia, who was re-elected on the General Shareholders’ Meeting of April 9th 2015 for a three-year term. The Secretary of the Board of Directors is Emilio García-Conde Noriega who is also the Secretary of the General Shareholder’s Meeting, and was appointed as Secretary of the Board of Directors on December 4th 2007. The Secretary of the Board of Directors’ mandate does not have an end of term date according to the Spanish Companies Law since he is a non-Member of the Board. The Chairman of the General Shareholders’ Meeting of EDPR has at his disposal, the appropriate human and logistical resources required for the performance of his duties. Therefore, in addition to the resources provided by the Company’s Secretary, the Company hires a specialized entity to collect, process and count the votes submitted by the shareholders on each General Shareholders’ Meeting.  B. EXERCISING THE RIGHT TO VOTE  12. VOTING RIGHTS RESTRICTIONS Each share entitles its holder to one vote. EDPR’s Articles of Association have no restrictions regarding voting rights.  13. VOTING RIGHTS EDPR’s Articles of Association have no reference to a maximum percentage of voting rights that may be exercised by a single shareholder or by shareholders that are in any relationship. All shareholders, regardless the number of shares owned, may attend to the General Shareholders’ Meeting and take part in its deliberations with right to speak and vote. In order to exercise their right to attend, the Company informs in the related Summon and Shareholders’ Guide of each General Shareholders’ Meeting, that the shareholders must have the ownership of their shares duly registered in the Book Entry Account at least five (5) days prior to the date of the General Shareholders’ Meeting. Any shareholder may be represented at the General Shareholders’ Meeting by a third party, even if this person is not a shareholder, by means of a revocable Power of Attorney. The Board of Directors may require shareholders’ Power of Attorney to be in the Company’s possession at least two (2) days in advance, indicating the name of the representative. Said powers of attorney shall be specific to each General Shareholders’ Meeting and can be evidenced, in writing or by remote means of communication, such as mail or post. Shareholders may vote on the topics included on Meeting’s Agenda, relating to any matters of their competence, by ordinary mail or electronic communication.  145  145   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Remote votes can be revoked subsequently by the same means used to cast them within the time limit established for that purpose or by personal attendance at the General Shareholders’ Meeting by the shareholder who casted the vote to his/her representative. The Board of Directors approves a Shareholder’s Guide for the General Shareholders’ Meeting, detailing mail and electronic communication voting forms among other matters. This Guide is available at www.edprenovaveis.com. Votes by mail shall be sent in writing to the place indicated on the Summon of the meeting, accompanied by the documentation indicated in the Shareholder’s Guide. In order to vote by electronic communication, the shareholders who requested it will receive a password within the time limit and in the form established in the Summon of the General Shareholders’ Meeting. Pursuant to the terms of article 15 of the Articles of Association, both electronic and mail-in votes must be received by the Company before midnight (24.00 hours) of the day before the scheduled meeting date of first call.  14. DECISIONS THAT CAN ONLY BE ADOPTED BY A QUALIFIED QUORUM According to EDPR’s Articles of Association and as established on the law, both ordinary and extraordinary General Shareholders’ Meetings are validly constituted when first called if the shareholders, either present or represented by proxy, represent at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the subscribed voting capital. On second call, the General Shareholders’ Meeting will be validly constituted regardless of the amount of the capital present or represented. To validly approve the issuance of bonds, the increase or reduction of capital, the transformation, global assignment of assets and liabilities, merger or spin-off of the Company, the transfer of the Registered Office abroad, the elimination of preemptive rights of new shares and in general any necessary amendment to the Articles of Association, in the Ordinary or Extraordinary Shareholders’ Meeting, it is required that on first call, the Shareholders, either present or represented by proxy, represent at least fifty percent (50%) subscribed voting capital and, on second call, at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the subscribed voting capital. In relation to the quorum required to validly approve these matters, in accordance with the Law and the Articles of Association, when the shareholders attending represent more than fifty percent (50%) of the subscribed voting capital, the above mentioned resolutions will be validly adopted by absolute majority and in the case the shareholders attending represent between the twenty-five percent (25%) and the fifty percent (50%) - but without reaching it - the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the present or represented capital in the General Shareholders’ Meeting will be required in order to approve these resolutions. EDPR has not established any mechanism that may intend to cause mismatching between the rights to receive dividends or the subscription of new securities and the voting right of each common share and has not adopted mechanisms that hinder the passing of resolutions by shareholders, including fixing a quorum for resolutions greater than that provided by the law.  II. MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION  A. COMPOSITION 15. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE MODEL EDPR is a Spanish Company listed in a regulated stock exchange in Portugal. EDP Renováveis’ corporate organization is subject to its personal law and to the extent possible, to the recommendations contained in the Portuguese Corporate Governance Code, (“Código de Governo das Sociedades”) approved by the Comissão do Mercado de Valores Mobiliários (CMVM - Portuguese Securities Market Commission) in July 2013. This governance code is available to the public at CMVM website (www.cmvm.pt).  146 146   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  The organization and functioning of EDPR corporate governance model aims to achieve the highest standards of corporate governance, business conduct and ethics referenced on the best national and international practices in corporate governance. EDPR has adopted the governance structure currently in effect in Spain. It comprises a General Shareholders’ Meeting and a Board of Directors that represents and manages the Company. As required by law and the Articles of Association, the Company’s Board of Directors has set up four committees. These are the Executive Committee, the Audit and Control Committee, the Nominations and Remunerations Committee and the Related-Party Transactions Committee. In order to ensure a better understanding of EDPR corporate governance by its shareholders, the Company publishes its updated Articles of Association as well as its Committees Regulations at www.edprenovaveis.com. The governance model of EDPR was designed to ensure the transparent and meticulous separation of duties and the specialization of supervision. EDPR’ bodies for the management and supervision model are the following:   General Shareholders’ Meeting    Board of Directors    Executive Committee    Audit and Control Committee    External auditor  The purpose of the choice of this model is to adapt, to the extent possible, the Company’s corporate governance structure to the Portuguese legislation. The governance model adopted by EDPR therefore seeks, as far as it is compatible with its personal law, to correspond to the so-called “Anglo-Saxon” model set forth in the Portuguese Commercial Companies Code, in which the management body is the Board of Directors, and the supervision and control duties are of the responsibility of an Audit and Control Committee. The experience of institutional operating indicates that the governance model approved by EDPR shareholders, and adopted in EDPR, is appropriate to the corporate organization of its activity, especially because it affords transparency and a healthy balance between the management functions of the Executive Committee, the supervisory functions of the Audit and Control Committee and oversight by different Board of Directors special committees. The institutional and functional relationship between the Executive Committee, the Audit and Control Committee and the other Non-Executive members of the Board of Directors has been of internal harmony conductive to the development of the Company’s business.  16. RULES FOR THE NOMINATION AND REPLACEMENT OF DIRECTORS According to Article 29.5 of the Company’s Articles of Association, the Nominations and Remunerations Committee is empowered by the Board of Directors to advise and inform the Board regarding the appointments (including by cooption), re-elections, dismissals and remuneration of Board Members and of its duties, as well as regarding the composition of the several Committees of the Board. The Committee also advises on the appointment, remuneration and dismissal of top management officers. The Committee proposes the appointment and re-election of the Directors and of the members of the various Committees by presenting a proposal with the names of the candidates that considers have the best qualities to fulfil the role of Board Member. Following the best Corporate Governance practices, during 2016 EDPR considered and discussed about the possible criteria applicable in the selection of the new members of its Governing Bodies. As a conclusion, within others, it was considered appropriate to take into account for this purpose the following: the education, experience in the energy sector, integrity and independence, having a proven expertise and the diversity that such candidate may provide to the related body. Based on this, the Board of Directors submits a proposal to the General Shareholders’ Meeting, which should be approved by majority for an initial period of three (3) years and may re-elect these members once or more times for further periods of three (3) years. Pursuant to Articles 23 of the Articles of Association and 243 of the Spanish Companies Law, shareholders may group their shares until constituting an amount of capital equal or higher than the result of dividing the company’s capital by  147  147   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  the number of Members of the Board, and in such case said shareholders are entitled to appoint a number of Directors equal to the result of the fraction using only whole amounts. Those shareholders making use of this power, cannot intervene in the nomination of the other members of the Board of Directors. In case of a vacancy, pursuant to Articles 23 of the Articles of Association and 244 of the Spanish Companies Law, the Board of Directors may co-opt a shareholder, who will occupy the position until the next General Shareholders’ Meeting, to which a proposal will be submitted for the ratification of said co-option. Pursuant to Article 248 of the Spanish Companies Law, the co-option of Directors must be approved by absolute majority of the Directors at the meeting.  17. COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS Pursuant to Articles 20 and 21 of the Company’s Articles of Association, the Board of Directors shall consist of no less than five (5) and no more than seventeen (17) Directors. The term of office shall be of three (3) years, and may be reelected once or more times for equal periods. The number of Board Members was established in seventeen (17) members according to the decision of the General Shareholders’ Meeting held on June 21st 2011. The current members of the Board of Directors are:  Board Member  Position  Date of first appointment  Date of re-election  End of term  António Mexia  Chairman  18/03/2008  09/04/2015  09/04/2018  Vice-Chairman, CEO  18/03/2008  09/04/2015  09/04/2018  Nuno Alves  Director  18/03/2008  09/04/2015  09/04/2018  Miguel Dias Amaro  Director  05/05/2015  -  09/04/2018  Gabriel Alonso  Director  21/06/2011  09/04/2015  09/04/2018  João Paulo Costeira  Director  21/06/2011  09/04/2015  09/04/2018  João Lopes Raimundo  Director  04/06/2008  09/04/2015  09/04/2018  João Manso Neto  João Manuel de Mello Franco  Director  04/06/2008  09/04/2015  09/04/2018  Jorge Santos  Director  04/06/2008  09/04/2015  09/04/2018  Manuel Menéndez Menéndez  Director  04/06/2008  09/04/2015  09/04/2018  Gilles August  Director  14/04/2009  09/04/2015  09/04/2018  Acácio Piloto  Director  26/02/2013  09/04/2015  09/04/2018  António Nogueira Leite  Director  26/02/2013  09/04/2015  09/04/2018  José Ferreira Machado  Director  26/02/2013  09/04/2015  09/04/2018  Allan J. Katz  Director  09/04/2015  -  09/04/2018  Francisca Guedes De Oliveira  Director  09/04/2015  -  09/04/2018  Francisco Seixas da Costa  Director  14/04/2016  -  14/04/2019  At the last General Shareholders’ Meeting, which took place on April 14th 2016, Francisco Seixas da Costa was appointed as member of the Board of Directors for a three-year term (3).  18. EXECUTIVE, NON-EXECUTIVE AND INDEPENDENT MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS EDPR’s Articles of Association, which are available for consultation on the Company’s website (www.edprenovaveis.com), contain the rules on independence for the fulfilment of duties in any body of the Company. The independence of the Directors is evaluated according to the Company’s personal law, the Spanish law. Despite the current CMVM recommendations do not specifically require a minimum of independent members within the Board of Directors, and only recommends to take into account some criteria as the adopted governance model, the size  148 148   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  of the Company, its shareholder structure and the relevant free float; Article 12 of EDPR’s Board of Directors regulations requires that at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the Members of the Board shall be independent. Article 20.2 of EDPR’s Articles of Association defines independent members of the Board of Directors as those who are able to perform their duties without being limited by relations with the Company, its significant Shareholders, or its management officers and comply with the other legal requirements. In addition, pursuant to Article 23 of the Articles of Association, the following may not be Directors:   People who are directors of or are associated with any competitor of EDPR, as well as those persons that have family relations with those directors. A Company shall be considered to be a competitor of EDPR, whenever it is engaged, if it is directly or indirectly involved in the production, storage, transport, distribution, marketing or supply of electricity or fuel gas and also those that have interests opposed to those of EDPR, a competitor or any of the companies in its group, and board members, employees, lawyers, consultants, or representatives of any of them. Under no circumstances shall companies belonging to the same group as EDPR, including abroad, be considered competitors;    People who are in any other situation of incompatibility or prohibition under the law or EDPR’s Articles of Association. Under Spanish law, people, who are i) aged under eighteen (18) years, (ii) disqualified, iii) competitors, (iv) convicted of certain offences, or (v) hold certain management positions, among others, are not allowed to be Directors.  The Chairman of EDPR’s Board of Directors does not have executive duties. In accordance with the law and pursuant the last amendment of Articles of Association, it has been established that the Non-Executive Directors can only be represented in the Board meetings by other Non-Executive Director. The following table includes the executive, non-executive and independent members of the Board of Directors. The independent members mentioned below meet the independence and compatibility criteria required by the law and the Articles of Association. Board Member  Position  Independent  Chairman and Non-Executive Director  -  Executive Vice-Chairman and Executive Director  -  Non-Executive Director*  -  Miguel Dias Amaro  Executive Director  -  Gabriel Alonso  Executive Director  -  João Paulo Costeira  Executive Director  -  João Lopes Raimundo  Non-Executive Director  Yes  João Manuel de Mello Franco  Non-Executive Director  Yes  Jorge Santos  Non-Executive Director  Yes  António Mexia João Manso Neto Nuno Alves  Manuel Menéndez Menéndez  Non-Executive Director  -  Gilles August  Non-Executive Director  Yes  Acácio Piloto  Non-Executive Director  Yes  António Nogueira Leite  Non-Executive Director  Yes  José Ferreira Machado  Non-Executive Director  Yes  Allan J. Katz  Non-Executive Director  Yes  Francisca Guedes de Oliveira  Non-Executive Director  Yes  Francisco Seixas da Costa  Non- Executive Director  Yes  * In 2016, Nuno Alves resigned from his position as member of the Executive Committee, being such resignation acknowledged by the Board of Directors on its meeting held on December 14th 2016. Regardless this resignation, Nuno Alves keeps his position as Non-Executive Member of the Board of Directors of EDPR.  149  149   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  19. PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS AND BIOGRAPHIES OF THE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS The positions held by the members of the Board of Directors in the last five (5) years, those that they currently hold, positions in Group and non-Group companies and other relevant curricular information is available in the Annex of this Report.  20. FAMILY, PROFESSIONAL AND BUSINESS RELATIONSHIPS OF THE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS WITH QUALIFYING SHAREHOLDERS Qualifying Shareholders in EDPR are subject to the Spanish Law, which regulates the criteria and thresholds of the shareholder’s holdings. As of December 31st 2016, and as far as the Company was informed, there are no family or business relationships of Members of the Board of Directors with qualifying shareholders but only professional relationships due to the fact that some of the Members of EDPR’s Board of Directors are currently Members of the Board of Directors in other companies belonging to the same group as EDP Energias de Portugal S.A., which are the following: •  António Mexia;  •  João Manso Neto;  •  Nuno Alves;  •  Manuel Menéndez Menéndez;  Or employees in other companies belonging to EDP’s Group, which are the following: •  Miguel Dias Amaro;  •  João Paulo Costeira.  21. MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE According to the Spanish Law and Spanish companies’ practices, the daily management of the business is guaranteed by a Chief Executive Officer who is empowered to ensure the day-to-day management of the Company. This type of organization is different from what occurs on the Portuguese companies in which a ”Conselho de Administração Executivo” takes the assignment of areas of business and each Executive Director is responsible to and for an area of business.  João Manso Neto CEO Emilio García-Conde General Secretary  Miguel Amaro CFO  150 150  João Paulo Costeira COO Europe & Brazil  Gabriel Alonso COO North America   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  B. FUNCTIONING 22. BOARD OF DIRECTORS REGULATIONS EDPR’s Board of Directors Regulations is available to the public on the Company’s website at www.edprenovaveis.com and at the Company’s headquarters at Plaza de la Gesta, 2, Oviedo, Spain.  23. NUMBER OF MEETINGS HELD BY THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS According to the Law and its Articles of Association, EDPR’s Board of Directors meeting take place at least once every quarter. During the year ending on December 31st 2016, the Board of Directors held six (6) meetings. Minutes of all meetings were drawn. The table below expresses the attendance percentage of the participation of the Directors to the meetings held during 2016:  Board Member António Mexia João Manso Neto  Position  Attendance*  Chairman and Non-Executive  33.33%  Executive Vice-Chairman and CEO  100%  Non-Executive**  83.33%  Miguel Dias Amaro  Executive  100%  Gabriel Alonso  Executive  100%  João Paulo Costeira  Executive  66.66%  João Lopes Raimundo  Non-Executive and Independent  100%  João Manuel de Mello Franco  Non-Executive and Independent  100%  Jorge Santos  Non-Executive and Independent  100%  Non-Executive  66.66%  Gilles August  Non-Executive and Independent  50%  Acácio Piloto  Non-Executive and Independent  100%  António Nogueira Leite  Non-Executive and Independent  83.33%  José Ferreira Machado  Non-Executive and Independent  83.33%  Allan J. Katz  Non-Executive and Independent  83.33%  Francisca Guedes de Oliveira  Non-Executive and Independent  83.33%  Francisco Seixas da Costa  Non- Executive and Independent  100%  Nuno Alves  Manuel Menéndez Menéndez  * The percentage reflects the meetings attended by the Members of the Board, provided that Francisco Seixas da Costa joined theBoard on April 14th 2016, and therefore, the percentage expressed is calculated over the meetings celebrated since then. ** In 2016, Nuno Alves resigned from his position as member of the Executive Committee, being such resignation acknowledged by the Board of Directors on its meeting held on December 14th 2016. Regardless this resignation, Nuno Alves keeps his position as Non-Executive Member of the Board of Directors of EDPR.  24. COMPETENT BODY FOR THE PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL OF EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS The Nominations and Remunerations Committee is the body responsible for the evaluation of the performance of the Executive Directors. According to Article 249 bis of the Spanish Companies Law, the Board of Directors supervises the effective functioning of its Committees as well as the performance of the delegated bodies and Directors designated.  151  151   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  25. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION CRITERIA The criteria for assessing the Executive Directors’ performance are described on topics 70, 71 and 72 of this Report.  26. AVAILABILITY OF THE MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS EDPR’s members of the Board of Directors are fully available for the performance of their duties having no constraints for the execution of this function simultaneously with other positions. The positions held at the same time in other companies within and outside the group, and other relevant activities undertaken by members of the Board of Directors throughout the financial year are listed in the Annex of this report.  C. COMMITTEES WITHIN THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OR SUPERVISORY BOARD AND BOARD DELEGATES  27. BOARD OF DIRECTORS’ COMMITTEES Pursuant to Article 10 of the Company’s Articles of Association, the Board of Directors may have delegated bodies. The Board of Directors has created four Committees: •  Executive Committee  •  Audit and Control Committee  •  Nominations and Remunerations Committee  •  Related-Party Transactions Committee  With the exception of the Executive Committee, all Committees are composed of independent members. The Board of Directors’ Committees regulations are available to the public at the Company’s website, www.edprenovaveis.com  28. EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE COMPOSITION Pursuant to Article 27 of the Company’s Articles of Association, the Executive Committee shall consist of no less than four (4) and no more than seven (7) Directors. Its constitution, the nomination of its members and the extension of the powers delegated must be approved by twothirds (2/3) of the members of the Board of Directors. On its meeting held on December 14th 2016, the Board of Directors acknowledged the resignation of Nuno Alves from his position as member of the Executive Committee, and therefore, the Board of Directors established the number of members of the Executive Committee in four (4), plus the Secretary. As of December 31st 2016, the members of this Committee are: •  João Manso Neto, who is the Chairman and CEO  •  Miguel Dias Amaro  •  Gabriel Alonso  •  João Paulo Costeira  Additionally, Emilio García-Conde Noriega is the Secretary of the Executive Committee.  152 152   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  29. COMMITTEES COMPETENCES  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE  FUNCTIONING In addition to the Articles of Association, this committee is also governed by its regulations approved on June 4th 2008 and  last  amended  on  November  2nd  2016.  The  committee  regulations  are  available  to  the  public  at  www.edprenovaveis.com. In order to adopt the best practices of Corporate Governance and with the aim of promoting the transparency in the management of the company, in the last modification of the regulations of this committee was included within the list of indelegable matters of the Board of Directors a clarification on the definition of the matters that should be considered as strategic matters based on economical, risk or special features criteria. The Executive Committee shall meet at least once a month and whenever is deemed appropriate by its Chairman, who may also suspend or postpone meetings when he sees fit. The Executive Committee shall also meet when requested by at least two (2) of its members. The Chairman of the Executive Committee, who is currently also the Vice-Chairman of the Board of Directors, submits to the Chairman of the of the Audit and Control Committee and to the rest of the members of the Board, the convening notices and minutes of the meetings of this Committee. Meetings of the Executive Committee are valid if half of its members plus one are present or represented. Decisions shall be adopted by majority. In the event of a tie, the Chairman shall have the casting vote. Executive Directors shall provide any clarifications needed by the other Directors or corporate bodies whenever requested to do so. The composition of the Executive Committee is described on the previous topic. The Executive Committee is a permanent body to which all the competences of the Board of Directors that are delegable under the law and the Articles of Association can be delegated, with the exception of the following:   Election of the Chairman of the Board of Directors;    Appointment of Directors by co-option;    Request to convene or convening of General Shareholders’ Meetings and the preparation of the agenda and proposals of resolutions;    Preparation of the Annual Report and Management Reports and their presentation to the General Shareholders’ Meeting;    Change of registered office;    Preparation and approval of mergers, spin-off, or transformation projects of the Company;    Monitoring the effective functioning of the Board of Directors committees and the performance of delegated bodies and appointed directors;    Definition of the Company´s general policies and strategies and in any case, being the following transactions, individually considered, subject of prior approval of the Board of Directors, or its ratification in cases of justified urgency:    Acquisition or sale of assets, rights or participations with an economic value higher than seventy-five million Euros (EUR 75,000,000) and not included in the budget approved by the Board of Directors; ‐  Opening or closing of establishments/branches or relevant parts of establishments /branches, as well as the extension or reduction of its activity;  ‐  Other business activity or transactions, including expansion investments, with a significant strategic relevance or with an economic value higher than seventy-five million Euros (EUR 75,000,000) and not included in the budget approved by the Board of Directors; or Creation or termination of strategic alliances or partnerships or other forms of long-term cooperation;    Authorization or waiver of the obligations arising from duty of loyalty;  153  153   ENERGY AS THE NEWART    Organization and functioning of the Board of Directors;    Preparation of any report required by the law to the management body, provided that the operation referred in the report cannot be delegated;    Appointment and dismissal of Chief Executive Officer, top management directly depending from the Board of Directors or any of its members, as well as their general contractual conditions including remuneration;    Decisions concerning director´s remuneration, within the Articles of Association’s frame and, if any, the remuneration policy approved by the General Meeting;    Policy concerning own shares;    The faculties that the General Meeting may have delegated on the Board of Directors, except for the cases expressly authorized by the first to subdelegate them.  2016 ACTIVITY In 2016 the Executive Committee held 50 meetings. The Executive Committee’s main activity is the daily management of the Company.  AUDIT AND CONTROL COMMITTEE  COMPOSITION Pursuant to Article 28 of the Company’s Articles of Association and Articles 8 and 9 of the Committee’s Regulations, the Audit and Control Committee consists of no less than three (3) and no more than five (5) members. According to Article 28.5 of the Articles of Association the term of office of the Chairman of the Audit and Control Committee is three (3) years after which he may be re-elected for another term of three (3) years. Jorge dos Santos was first elected on April 8th, 2014 for the position of Chairman of the Audit and Control Committee, following the opinion presented by the Nominations and Remuneration Committee. The Audit and Control Committee consists of three (3) independent members, plus the Secretary. As of December 31st 2016, the members of the Audit and Control Committee are:   Jorge Santos, who is the Chairman    João Manuel de Mello Franco    João Lopes Raimundo  Additionally, Mr. Emilio García-Conde Noriega is the Secretary of the Audit and Control Committee.  COMPETENCES The competences of the Audit and Control Committee are as follows:   Reporting, through the Chairman, to the General Shareholders’ Meetings on questions falling under its jurisdiction;    Proposing the appointment of the Company’s auditors to the Board of Directors for subsequent approval by the General Shareholders’ Meeting, as well as the contractual conditions, scope of the work – specially concerning audit services, “audit related” and “non-audit” – annual activity evaluation and revocation or renovation of the auditor appointments;    Supervising the finance reporting and the functioning of the internal risk management and control systems, as well as, evaluating those systems and proposing the adequate adjustments according to the Company necessities;    154 154  Supervising internal audits and compliance;   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016    Establishing a permanent contact with the external auditors to assure the conditions of independence, the adequate provision of services, acting as the Company speaker for these subjects related to the auditing process, and receiving and maintaining information on any other questions regarding accounting subjects;    Preparing an annual report on its supervisory activities, including eventual constraints, and expressing an opinion on the Management Report, the accounts and the proposals presented by the Board of Directors;    Receiving notices of financial and accounting irregularities presented by the Company’s employees, shareholders, or entities that have a direct interest and judicially protected, related with the Company’s social activity;    Engaging the services of experts to collaborate with Committee members in the performance of their functions. When engaging the services of such experts and determining their remuneration, it must be taken into account the importance of the matters entrusted to them and the economic situation of the Company;    Drafting reports at the request of the Board and its committees;    Any other powers entrusted to it by the Board of Directors or the Articles of Association.  FUNCTIONING In addition to the Articles of Association and the law, this committee is governed by its regulations approved on June 4th 2008 and amended on May 4th 2010 available to the public at www.edprenovaveis.com. The committee shall meet at least once a quarter and additionally whenever its Chairman sees fit. This committee shall draft minutes of every meeting held and inform the Board of Directors of its decisions at the first Board meeting after each committee meeting. Decisions shall be adopted by majority. The Chairman shall have the casting vote in the event of a tie.  2016 ACTIVITY In 2016 the Audit and Control Committee’s activities included the following:   Monitor the closure of quarterly accounts, first half-year and year-end accounts, to familiarize itself with the preparation and disclosure of financial information, internal audit, internal control and risk management activities;    Analysis of relevant rules to which the committee is subject in Portugal and Spain;    Information about the rules of the appointment of the External Auditor and its independence;    Assessment of the external auditor’s work, especially concerning the scope of work in 2016, approval of all “audit related” and “non-audit” services and analysis of external auditor’s remuneration;    Supervision of the quality and integrity of the financial information in the financial statements and participation in the Executive Committee meeting at which these documents were analyzed and discussed;    Drafting of an opinion in the individual and consolidated annual reports and accounts, in a quarterly, half year and yearly basis;    Monitoring of the 2016 Internal Audit Action Plan AND Pre-approval of the 2017 Internal Audit Action Plan;    Supervision of the quality, integrity and efficiency of the internal control system, risk management and internal auditing;    Evaluation of the Governance structure of the Company;    Information about Whistle-Blowing;    Information about the contingencies affecting to the Group;    Information about the proposal of application of results for the fiscal year ended on December 31st and the distribution of dividends;    Quarterly and annual report of its activities.  The Audit and Control Committee found no constraints during its control and supervision activities. The information regarding the meetings celebrated by this Committee and the attendance of its related members during the year 2016 is described at topic 35.  155  155   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  NOMINATIONS AND REMUNERATIONS COMMITTEE  COMPOSITION Pursuant to Article 29 of the Company’s Articles of Association and Articles 8 and 9 of its Regulations, the Nominations and Remunerations Committee shall consist of no less than three (3) and no more than six (6) members. At least one of its members must be independent and shall be the Chairman of the committee. In accordance with Recommendation 52 of the Spanish Unified Code of Good Governance (Código Unificado de Buen Gobierno) approved by the Board of CNMV on February 18th 2015, the Nominations and Remunerations Committee must be entirely constituted by Non-Executive Directors and being the majority of them independent. In compliance with this Recommendation, and to the extent possible with the recommendation indicated in chapter II.3.1 of the Portuguese Code of Corporate Governance (as in Spain this committee may only be comprised of Directors), EDPR’s Nominations and Remunerations Committee is entirely constituted by Non-Executive and independent members of its Board of Directors. Pursuant the proposal of the Nominations and Remunerations Committee, on the Board of Directors meeting held on Abril 14th 2016 was approved to increase the number of members of this committee from three (3) to four (4) and appoint the new Director Francisco Seixas da Costa as member of this Committee. Considering this new appointment, as of December 31st 2016, the Nominations and Remunerations Committee consists of four (4) independent members, plus the Secretary. The current members are:   João Manuel de Mello Franco, who is the Chairman    António Nogueira Leite    Acácio Jaime Liberado Mota Piloto    Francisco Seixas da Costa  Additionally, Emilio García-Conde Noriega is the Secretary of the Nominations and Remunerations Committee. None of the committee members are spouses or up to third degree relatives in direct line of the other members of the Board of Directors. The committee members shall maintain their positions for as long as they are Company Directors. Nonetheless, the Board may decide to discharge members of the committee at any time and the members may resign said positions while remaining Company Directors.  COMPETENCES The Nominations and Remunerations Committee is a permanent body belonging to the Board of Directors with an informative and consultative nature and its recommendations and reports are not binding. The Nominations and Remunerations Committee has no executive functions. The main functions of the Nominations and Remunerations Committee are to assist and report to the Board of Directors about appointments (including by cooption), re-elections, dismissals, and the remuneration of the Board Members and its position about the composition of the Board of Directors, as well as the appointment, remuneration, and dismissal of executive staff. The Nominations and Remunerations Committee shall also inform the Board of Directors on general remuneration policy and incentives for Board members and executive staff. These functions include the following:   Defining the standards and principles governing the composition of the Board of Directors and the selection and appointment of its members;    Proposing the appointment and re-election of Directors in cases of appointment by co-option and in other cases for the submission to the General Shareholders’ Meeting by the Board of Directors;    Proposing to the Board of Directors the candidates for the different committees;  156 156   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016    Proposing to the Board, within the limits established in the Articles of Association, the remuneration system, distribution method, and amounts payable to the Directors;    Making proposals to the Board of Directors on the conditions of the contracts signed with Directors;    Informing and making proposals to the Board of Directors regarding the appointment and/or removal of executives and the conditions of their contracts and generally defining the hiring and remuneration policies of executive staff;    Reviewing and reporting on incentive plans, pension plans, and compensation packages;    Reflecting on the governance system adopted by EDPR in order to identify areas for improvement;    Any other functions assigned to it in the Articles of Association or by the Board of Directors.  FUNCTIONING In addition to the Articles of Association, the Nominations and Remunerations Committee is governed by its Regulations approved on June 4th 2008. The committee’s regulations are available at www.edprenovaveis.com. This committee shall meet at least once every quarter and also whenever its Chairman sees fit. This committee shall draft minutes of every meeting held and inform the Board of Directors of its decisions at the first Board meeting after each committee meeting. Decisions shall be adopted by majority. The Chairman shall have the deciding vote in the event of a tie.  2016 ACTIVITY In 2016 the Nominations and Remunerations Committee activities were:   Proposing to the Board of Directors the submission of the ratification by the Shareholder’s Meeting of the appointment by co-option of Miguel Dias Amaro, approved by the Board of Directors on its meeting celebrated on May 9, 2015;    Proposing the names of the candidates for the election of new members of the Board of Directors due to the vacancy position, to be submitted to the Board and approved by the General Shareholders’ Meeting;    Performance evaluation of the Board of Directors and the Executive Committee;    Drafting update and consequent approval of the Performance Evaluation and Remuneration Model for 20142016 as well as making a preliminary analysis of the Performance Evaluation and Evaluation model for 20172019;    Drafting of the Remuneration Policy to propose to the Board of Directors and to be approved at the General Shareholders’ Meeting;    Report of the activities performed during the year 2015;    Proposing to the Board of Directors to increase by one (1) member the composition of the Nominations and Remunerations Committee, and so proposing the names of the candidates to occupy this new vacancy;    Proposing to the Board of Directors the appointment of EDPR’s Compliance Officer;    Following the best Corporate Governance practices: ‐ ‐  Proposing to the Board of Directors the establishment of the composition of the Executive Committee in four (4) members in charge of the daily management of the Company; Proposing to the Board of Directors the Related Party Transactions Committee to be formed exclusively by independent members, and therefore proposing the names of the candidates to enter as members of this committee in compliance with this measure;  ‐   Proposing the implementation of a plan regarding the criteria to apply for the identification of new Governing Bodies candidates as described in topic 16 of this report.  Reflection on the Corporate Governance system adopted by EDPR.  157  157   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  RELATED-PARTY TRANSACTIONS COMMITTEE  COMPOSITION Pursuant to Article 30 of the Articles of Association, the Board of Directors may set up other committees, such as the Related-Party Transactions Committee. This committee shall consist of no fewer than three (3) members the majority of whom must be independent. Currently, the Related-Party Transactions committee consists of three (3) independent members plus the Secretary. Members of the Related Party Transactions Committee shall be considered independent if they can perform their duties without being conditioned by relations with EDPR, its majority shareholders or its Directors and where appropriate, meet the other requirements of the applicable legislation. At the Board of Directors meeting held on December 14th 2016, in accordance with the best practices and the policy of rotation of the committees’ members and the entrance of new ones, the Board acknowledged the resignation of Nuno Alves from his position as member of the Related Party Transactions Committee and pursuant to the proposal of the Nomination and Remuneration Committee, Acácio Piloto was appointed as new member of the Related Party Transactions Committee to fill this vacancy. As of this date and currently, the members of this Committee are:   José Ferreira Machado, who is the Chairman    Acácio Jaime Liberado Mota Piloto    Francisca Guedes de Oliveira  Additionally, Emilio García-Conde Noriega is the Secretary of the Related Party Transactions Committee. The committee members shall maintain their positions for as long as they are Company Directors. Nevertheless, the Board may decide to discharge members of the committee at any time and the members may resign said positions while still remaining Company Directors.  COMPETENCES The Related Party Transactions Committee is a permanent body belonging to the Board of Directors that performs the following duties, without prejudice, to others that the Board may assign to it:   Periodically reporting to the Board of Directors on the commercial and legal relations between EDPR or related entities and EDP or related entities;    In connection with the approval of the Company's annual results, reporting on the commercial and legal relations between the EDPR Group and the EDP Group and the transactions between related entities during the fiscal year in question;    Ratifying transactions between EDPR and/or related entities with EDP and/or related entities by the stipulated deadline in each case, provided that the value of the transaction exceeds EUR 5,000,000 or represents 0.3% of the consolidated annual income of the EDPR Group for the previous fiscal year;    Ratifying any modification of the Framework Agreement signed by EDPR and EDP on May 7th 2008;    Making recommendations to the Board of Directors of the Company or its Executive Committee regarding the transactions between EDPR and related entities with EDP and related entities;    Asking EDP for access to the information needed to perform its duties;    Ratifying, in the correspondent term according to the necessities of each specific case, the transactions between Qualifying Holdings other than EDP with entities from the EDP Renováveis Group whose annual value is superior to EUR 1,000,000;    Ratifying, in the corresponding terms according to the necessities of each specific case, the transactions between Board Members, “Key Employees” and/or Family Members with entities from EDP Renováveis Group whose annual value is superior to EUR 75,000.  158 158   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  In case the Related Party Transactions Committee does not ratify the commercial or legal relations between EDP or its related entities and EDP Renováveis and its related entities, as well as those related with Qualifying Holders other than EDP, Board Members, “Key Employees” and/or their relatives, such relations must be approved by 2/3 of the members of the Board of Directors as long as half of the members proposed by entities different from EDP, including independent Directors, vote favorably, except when a majority of members expresses its approval prior to submitting the matter to the Related Party Transactions Committee for its approval. The terms of the bullet points above shall not apply to transactions between EDP or its related entities and EDP Renováveis or its related entities carried out under standardized conditions, and are applied equally to different related entities of EDP and EDPR, even standardized price conditions.  FUNCTIONING In addition to the Articles of Association, the Related-Party Transactions Committee is governed by its regulations approved on June 4th 2008 and amended on February 28th 2012. The committee’s regulations are available at www.edprenovaveis.com. This committee shall draft minutes of every meeting held and inform the Board of Directors of decisions that it makes at the first Board meeting held after each committee meeting. Decisions shall be adopted by majority. The Chairman shall have the casting vote in the event of a tie.  2016 ACTIVITY In 2016, the Related Party Transactions Committee revised, approved and proposed to the Board of Directors the approval of all agreements and contracts between related parties submitted to its consideration. Chapter E – I, topic 90, of this report includes a description of the fundamental aspects of the agreements and contracts between related parties.  III. SUPERVISION  A. COMPOSITION 30. SUPERVISORY BOARD MODEL ADOPTED EDPR’s governance model, as long as it is compatible with its personal law, the Spanish law, corresponds to the socalled “Anglo-Saxon” model set forth in the Portuguese Commercial Companies Code, in which the management body is a Board of Directors, and the supervision and control duties are of the responsibility of an Audit and Control Committee.  31. COMPOSITION OF THE AUDIT AND CONTROL COMMITTEE Composition of Audit and Control Committee is reflected on topic 29. The term of office and the dates of first appointment of the members of the Audit and Control Committee are the following: Member  Position  Jorge Santos  First appointment date  Chairman  03/05/2011  João Manuel de Mello Franco  Vocal  04/06/2008  João Lopes Raimundo  Vocal  11/04/2011  159  159   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  32. INDEPENDENCE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE AUDIT AND CONTROL COMMITTEE Information concerning the independence of the members of the Audit and Control Committee is available on the chart of topic 18 of the report. As mentioned on the first paragraph of topic 18, the independence of the members of the Board and of its Committees is evaluated according to the Company’s personal law, the Spanish law.  33. PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS AND BIOGRAPHIES OF THE MEMBERS OF THE AUDIT AND CONTROL COMMITTEE Professional qualifications of each member of the Audit and Control Committee and other important curricular information, are available in the Annex of this report.  B. FUNCTIONING 34. AUDIT AND CONTROL COMMITTEE REGULATIONS The  Audit  and  Control  Committee  regulations  are  available  to  the  public  at  the  Company’s  website,  www.edprenovaveis.com and at the Company’s Headquarters at Plaza de la Gesta, 2, Oviedo, Spain.  35. NUMBER OF MEETINGS HELD BY THE AUDIT AND CONTROL COMMITTEE In 2016, the Audit and Control Committee held sixteen (16) meetings, seven (7) of those meetings were formal and the other nine (9) were informal. From April 4th to 6th, the CFO of EDPR Miguel Dias Amaro and vocal of the Auditing and Control Committee, João de Mello Franco, visited EDPR NA in Houston, where they met EDPR NA CEO Gabriel Alonso and EDPR NA CFO Bernardo Goarmon and the local teams to analyze the activity of the Company during 2015 and 2016 and the perspective of energy market evolution during the next years. The Audit and Control Committee also attended the meetings organized by EDP’s General Supervisory Board and participated in September on the Annual Meeting of the Audit and Control Committees of EDP’s Group. The table below shows the attendance percentage to the meetings of the Audit and Control Committee by its members. During the year 2016 none of the members delegated their votes in other member.  Member  Position  Jorge Santos  Attendance  Chairman  100%  João Manuel de Mello Franco  Vocal  100%  João Lopes Raimundo  Vocal  83.33%  36. AVAILABILITY OF THE MEMBERS OF THE AUDIT AND CONTROL COMMITTEE The members of the Audit and Control Committee are fully available for the performance of their duties having no constraints for the execution of this function simultaneously with positions in other companies. The positions held simultaneously in other companies inside and outside the Group and other relevant activities undertaken by members of this Committee throughout the financial year are listed in the Annex of this report.  160 160   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  C. POWERS AND DUTIES 37. PROCEDURES FOR HIRING ADDITIONAL SERVICES TO THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR In EDPR there is a policy of pre-approval by the Audit and Control Committee for the selection of the External Auditor and any related entity for non-audit services, according to Recommendation IV.2 of the Portuguese Corporate Governance Code. This policy was strictly followed during 2016. The services, other than auditing services, provided by the External Auditor and entities in a holding relationship with or incorporated in the same network as the External Auditor were previously approved by the Audit and Control Committee according to Article 8.2, b) of its Regulations and upon review of each specific service, which considered the following aspects: (i) such services having no effect on the independence of the External Auditor and any safeguards used; and (ii) the position of the External Auditor in the provision of such services, notably the External Auditor’s experience and knowledge of the Company. Furthermore, although hiring services other than auditing services to the External Auditor is admissible, it is envisaged as an exception. In 2016 such services reached only around 2.9% of the total amount of services provided to the Company.  38. OTHER DUTIES OF THE AUDIT AND CONTROL COMMITTEE Apart from the competences expressly delegated on the Audit and Control Committee according to Article 8 of its Regulations and in order to safeguard the independence of the External Auditor, the following powers of the Audit and Control Committee were exercised during the 2016 financial year and should be highlighted: •  Appoint and hire the External Auditor and responsibility for establishing their remuneration as well as preapproval of any services to be hired from the External Auditor and perform its direct and exclusive supervision;  •  Assessment of the qualifications, independence, and performance of the External Auditors, and obtaining, yearly and directly from the External Auditors, written information on all relations existing between the Company and the Auditors or associated persons, including all services rendered and all services in progress. In order to evaluate independence, the Audit Committee, obtained the information regarding External Auditors’ independence in light of the Spanish Royal-Decree no. 1/2011 of July 1st 2011;  •  Review of the transparency report, signed by the Auditor and disclosed at its website. This report covers the matters provided for under Spanish Royal-Decree no. 1/2011 of July 1st 2011, including those regarding the quality control internal system of the audit firm and the quality control procedures carried out by the competent authorities;  •  Definition of the Company’s hiring policy concerning persons who have worked or currently work with the External Auditors;  •  Review, with the External Auditors, of the scope, planning, and resources to be used in their services;  •  Responsibility for the settlement of any differences between the Executive Committee and the External Auditors concerning financial information;  •  Contracts signed between EDPR and its Qualified Shareholders that were analyzed by the Audit and Control Committee. This information is included on the annual report of the Audit and Control Committee regarding those cases that needed a previous opinion from the committee.  Within this context, it should be particularly stressed that the External Auditor’s independence was safeguarded by the implementation of the Company’s policy for the pre-approval of the services to be hired to External Auditors (or any entity in a holding relationship with or incorporating the same network as the External Auditors), which results from the application of the rules issued by the European Union on this matter. According to such policy, the Audit and Control Committee makes an overall pre-approval of the services proposal made by the External Auditors and a specific preapproval of other services that will eventually be provided by the External Auditors, particularly, tax consultancy services and services other than “audit and audit related” services.  161  161   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  IV-V. STATUTORY AND EXTERNAL AUDITORS 39-41. According to the Spanish law, the External Auditor (“Auditor de Cuentas”) is appointed by the General Shareholders’ Meeting and corresponds to the statutory auditor body (“Revisor Oficial de Contas”) described on the Portuguese Law. Consequently, the information regarding points 39 to 41 is available on chapter V of the report, points 42 to 47.  42. EXTERNAL AUDITOR IDENTIFICATION EDPR’s External Auditor is, since 2007, KPMG Auditores S.L., a Spanish Company whose partner in charge of accounts auditing is, currently and since January 2014, Estibaliz Bilbao. KPMG Auditores S.L. is registered at the Spanish Official Register of Auditors under number S0702 and with Tax Identification Number B-78510153.  43. NUMBER OF YEARS OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR KPMG Auditores S.L. is in charge of EDPR’s accounts auditing having carried these duties during nine consecutive years from the date EDPR became Public Interest Entity.  44. ROTATION POLICY According to CMVM’s Recommendation IV.3 of its 2013 Corporate Governance Code, the companies shall rotate the auditor after two or three terms whether they are of four or three years, respectively, being the maximum nine years. On the other hand, according to the personal Law of EDPR -the Spanish Law-, recently amended in October 2015, the maximum term for an auditing firm is established in a 10-year term, from the date the company is declared as a “Public Interest Entity”. In the case of EDPR, this date is when the IPO was launched in 2008. On December 31st 2016, KPMG Auditores S.L. has ended its ninth (9th) consecutive year as EDPR’s External Auditor from the date that it became Public Interest Entity. The Company is compliant with Recommendation IV.3 of the Portuguese Corporate Governance Code and also with its personal Law.  45. EXTERNAL AUDITOR EVALUATION The Audit and Control Committee is responsible for the evaluation of the External Auditor according to the competences granted by its Regulations. The evaluation of the Audit and Control Committee is made once a year. The Audit and Control Committee acts as the company speaker for the relevant matters with the External Auditor and establishes a permanent contact throughout the year to assure the conditions, including the independence, adequate to the services provided by them related to the auditing process, and receiving and maintaining information on any other questions regarding accounting subjects. In 2016, according to the Audit and Control Committee’s competences and in line with Recommendation II.2.2, it was the first and direct recipient and the corporate body in charge of the permanent contact with the external auditor on matters that may pose a risk to their independence and any other matters related to the auditing of accounts. It also receives and stores information on any other matters provided for in legislation on audits and in auditing standards in effect at any time. The External Auditor within the scope of its duties, verified the implementation of the remuneration policies and systems of the corporate bodies as well as the efficiency and effectiveness of the internal control mechanisms and report any shortcomings to the supervisory body of the Company.  162 162   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  46. NON-AUDIT SERVICES CARRIED OUT BY THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR According to the rules described on topic 29 of this Report, in EDPR there is a policy of pre-approval by the Audit and Control Committee for the selection non-audit services according to Article 8.2, b) of the Audit and Control Committee Regulations. During 2016 the non-audit services provided by the External Auditor for EDPR’s business units consisted mostly on KPMG's compliance statement in the context of contractual agreements. KPMG was engaged to provide the above-mentioned services due to its in-depth knowledge of the Group’s activities and tax related matters. These engagements did not risk the independence of the External Auditor and were pre-approved by the Audit and Control Committee prior to rendering the services. 47. EXTERNAL AUDITOR REMUNERATION IN 2016  Type of services (€) Audit and statutory audit Other audit services Total audit related services Tax consultancy services  Portugal  Spain  Brazil  US  Other  Total  %  221,347  584,070  125,635  1,023,002  809,546  2,763,700  90.4%  4,000  199,430  -  6,776  10,240  200,057  6.6%  225,347  783,500  125,635  1,029,778  773,886  2,938,146  97.0%  -  -  -  -  -  -  0.0%  Other services un related to statutory auditing  10,900  41,418  -  -  35,291  87,609  2.9%  Total non-audit related services  10,900  41,418  -  -  35,291  87,609  2.9%  236,247  804,529  125,635  1,029,778  855,178  3,051,366  100%  Total  163  163   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  C. Internal Organization  I. ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION  48. AMENDMENTS TO THE ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION Amendments to the Articles of Association of the Company are of the responsibility of the General Shareholders’ Meeting who has the power to decide on this matter. According to Article 17 of the Company’s Articles of Association (“Constitution of the General Shareholders’ Meeting, Adoption of resolutions”), to validly approve any necessary amendment to the Articles of Association, the Ordinary or Extraordinary Shareholders’ Meeting will need: •  On first call, that the Shareholders either present or represented by proxy, represent at least fifty percent (50%) of the subscribed voting capital.  •  On second call, that the Shareholders either present or represented by proxy, represent at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the subscribed voting capital.  In the event that the shareholders attending represent more than fifty percent (50%) of the subscribed voting capital, the resolutions referred to in the present paragraph will only be validly adopted when reached absolute majority. If the shareholders attending represent between twenty-five percent (25%) and fifty percent (50%) – but without reaching it – the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the present or represented capital in the General Shareholders’ Meeting will be required in order to validly approve these resolutions.  II. REPORTING OF IRREGULARITIES  49. IRREGULARITIES COMMUNICATION CHANNELS  WHISTLEBLOWING EDPR has always carried out its activity by consistently implementing measures to ensure the good governance of its companies, including the prevention of incorrect practices, particularly in the areas of accounting and finance. EDPR provides the Group workers with a channel enabling them to report directly and confidentially to the Audit and Control Committee any practice presumed illicit or any alleged accounting and/or financial irregularity in their Company, in compliance with the provisions of CMVM Regulation no. 4/2013. With this channel for reporting irregular accounting and financial practices, EDPR aims to: •  Guarantee conditions that allow workers to freely report any concerns they may have in these areas to the Audit and Control Committee;  •  Facilitate the early detection of irregular situations, which, if practiced, might cause serious damage to the EDPR Group, its workers, customers and shareholders.  Contact with the Company’s Audit and Control Committee is only possible by email and post, and access to information received is restricted. Any complaint addressed to the Audit and Control Committee will be kept strictly confidential and the whistle-blower will remain anonymous, provided that this does not prevent the investigation of the complaint. He/she will be assured that  164 164   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  the Company will not take any retaliatory or disciplinary action as a result of exercising his/her right to blow the whistle on irregularities, provide information, or assist in an investigation. The Secretary of the Audit and Control Committee receives all the communications and presents a quarterly report to the members of the Committee. In 2016 there were no communications regarding any irregularity at EDPR.  ETHICS CHANNEL AND CODE OF ETHICS EDPR has a Code of Ethics published on its intranet and its website, which includes principles like transparency, honesty, integrity, non-discrimination, equal opportunity, and sustainability. The Code of Ethics has been widely circulated among employees of the Group through internal communications mechanisms, individual shipments, delivery to new employees, and intranet publishing. On February 2014, the Board of Directors approved an updated version of the Code of Ethics. There is a strong commitment by the Company in relation to the dissemination and promotion of compliance with the Code available to all employees through training, questionnaires, and open discussions of the findings. To this extent, from March to December 2016, EDP offered an online Ethics training (“Ética EDP”) available to all employees of both Europe/Brazil and North America platforms. This course achieved a major participation of around 900 EDPR employees. There is also an Ethics Channel and Ethics Regulation to articulate any specific claims of the Code of Ethics and to resolve doubts on all matters relating to the Code of Ethics. Communications regarding possible breaches of the Code of Ethics are sent to the Ethics Ombudsman, who performs a first analysis, forwarding its conclusions to the Ethics Committee of EDPR, which receives, records, processes, and reports it to the Board of Directors. In 2016 there was one (1) communication to the Ethics Ombudsmen through the Ethics Channel. However, it was not considered as an issue related to the Ethics Code and it will be suggested to be rejected during the next Committee Ethics. The issue has been submitted to the responsible area in order to be analyzed and take the corresponding measures. The Ethics Code is available at our website www.edprenovaveis.com  ANTI-CORRUPTION POLICY In order to ensure compliance with the standards of Anti-Corruption Regulation in every geography where EDPR operates, the Company developed in 2014 an Anti-Bribery Policy of application to all EDPR Group, which was approved by its Board of Directors on December 19th 2014. This Anti-Corruption Policy implies a series of new procedures regarding the relationships of EDPR employees with external parties, namely the approval of certain actions regarding hospitality to and from external parties, charitable donations, and sponsorships. This Policy was implemented in the Group in 2015, through the introduction of several approval systems in the corporate’s employee channels in order to ensure transparency and prevent any corrupt business practice, and was communicated to all EDPR employees. Once this implementation was finished, the corresponding training sessions were organized for part of our employees, and made available in the intranet, in order to ensure appropriate knowledge and understanding of the Policy. The Anti-Corruption Policy is available at our website www.edprenovaveis.com  165  165   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  III. INTERNAL CONTROL AND RISK MANAGEMENT 50. INTERNAL AUDIT EDPR’s Internal Audit Department is composed by seven (7) members. The function of EDPR’s Internal Audit is to carry out an objective and independent assessment of the Group’s activities and of its internal control situation, in order to make recommendations to improve the internal control mechanisms over systems and management processes in accordance with the Group’s objectives. Additionally, EDPR has a Responsibilities Model and a SCIRF Manual (Internal Control System over Financial Reporting), in which individuals, governing bodies and committees responsible for implementing and managing the internal control system are indicated. The Responsibilities Model includes the functions and main activities in the management and maintenance of the system at all levels of the organization including monitoring activities related to the annual cycle, the implementation of controls and documentation of evidence and supervision activities. The SCIRF Manual incorporates the general principles of the Internal Control System over Financial Reporting as well as the methodology used, the procedures for ensuring the effectiveness of internal control and design of models, documentation, evaluation and reporting. In line with the general principles of the model adopted by EDPR for the management of the SCIRF, the COSO Internal Control Integrated Framework 2013 (Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission), the responsibility for supervising the Internal Control System lies in the Board of Directors and the Audit and Control Committee. The CEO is accountable before the Board and must ensure the proper functioning and effectiveness of the SCIRF, promoting its design, implementation and maintenance. The Executive Committee must support the CEO in this task, guiding the development of the Entity Level Controls of the Company and the controls in their areas of responsibility, relying when necessary on other levels of the organization. Also, the Senior Managers are responsible for evaluating any deficiencies and implementing appropriate improvement opportunities. To fulfil these responsibilities, EDPR’s Internal Audit offers support and advice for the management and development of the SCIRF.  51. ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF INTERNAL AUDIT The Internal Audit function in EDPR Group is a corporate function carried out by the Internal Audit Department, that reports both to the Chairman of EDPR’s Executive Committee and to EDPR’s Audit and Control Committee.  Board of Directors  Executive Committee  Audit and Control Committee  Internal Audit  52. RISK MANAGEMENT EDPR’s Enterprise Risk Management Process is an integrated and transversal management model that ensures the minimization of the effects of risk on EDPR's capital and earnings, as well as the implementation of best practices of Corporate Governance and transparency. The process aligns EDPR’s risk exposure with the company’s desired risk profile.  166 166   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  The process is closely followed and supervised by the Audit and Control Committee, an independent supervisory body composed of Non-Executive members. Market, counterparty, operational, business and strategic risks are identified and assessed and, following the result of the assessment, Risk Policies are defined and implemented across the company. These policies are aimed to mitigate risks without compromising potential opportunities, thus, optimizing return versus risk exposure. During 2016, EDPR defined the Enterprise Risk Management Framework of the Group and reassessed Operational Risk for the company, executing a bottom-up analysis across all departments, as stated in EDPR’s Operational Risk Policy.  53. RISK MAP Risk Management at EDPR is focused on covering all risks of the company. In order to have a holistic view of risks, they are grouped in Risk Categories, which are Market, Counterparty, Operational, Business and Strategic. The definition of Risk Categories at EDPR is as follows: 1. Market Risk – It refers to the risk to EDPR resulting from movements in market prices. Due to the relationship between wind production and electricity price, production risk is considered within market risk. In particular, market risk are changes in electricity prices, production risk, interest rates, foreign exchange rates and other commodity prices; 2. Counterparty Risk (credit and operational) – Risk that counterparty to a transaction could default before final settlement of the transaction’s cash flows. A direct economic loss would occur if transactions with the counterparty had positive economic value at the time of default. Even in the case of not defaulting, it may not comply with its contract obligations (timing, quality, etc.), implying additional higher costs due to its replacement or to delays in fulfilling the contract; 3. Operational Risk (other than counterparty) – Defined as the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external events (such as an increase in equipment default rates, increasing O&M, or natural disasters); 4. Business Risk – Potential loss in the company’s earnings due to adverse changes in business margins. Such losses can result above all from a serious increase in equipment prices or changes in the regulatory environment. Changes in electricity prices and production are considered market risks; 5. Strategic Risk – It refers to risks coming from macroeconomic, political, social or environmental situation in countries where EDPR is present, as well as those coming from a change in competitive landscape, from technology disruptions, from changes in energy markets or from governance decisions (investment decisions criteria, Corporate Governance and Reputational issues). Within each Risk Category, risks are classified in Risk Groups.  1. Market Risk 1. i) Electricity price risk EDPR faces limited electricity price risk as it pursues a strategy of being present in countries or regions with long-term visibility on revenues. In most countries where EDPR is present, prices are determined through regulated framework mechanisms. In those countries with no regulated tariffs, power purchase agreements are negotiated with different offtakers to eliminate electricity and Green Certificate or Renewable Energy Credit (REC) price risks. Despite EDPR’s strategy of eliminating market price risk, EDPR still has some plants with merchant exposure. In Europe, EDPR operates in countries where the selling price is defined by a feed-in-tariff (Portugal, France and Italy) or in markets where, on top of the electricity price, EDPR receives either a pre-defined regulated premium or a green certificate, whose price is achieved on a regulated market (Spain, Belgium, Poland and Romania). EDPR is also developing investment activity in the UK, where current incentive system is based on green certificates but will change to a feed in tariff.  167  167   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  In countries with a pre-defined regulated premium or a green certificate scheme, EDPR is exposed to electricity price fluctuations. Considering current Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) in place, EDPR is exposed to electricity price risk in Romania, in Poland and partially in Spain. Additionally, in European countries with a green certificate scheme (Romania and Poland), EDPR is exposed to fluctuation on the price of green certificates. The US market does not provide a regulated framework system for the electricity price. Nevertheless, renewable generation is incentivized through PTCs (Production Tax Credits) and regional Renewable Portfolio Standard (RPS) programs that allow receiving RECs for each MWh of renewable generation. REC prices are very volatile and depend on the regional supply/demand equilibrium in the relevant market. Most of EDPR’s capacity in the US has predefined prices determined by bundled (electricity + REC) long-term contracts with local utilities in line with the Company’s policy of avoiding electricity price risk. Despite existing long term contracts, some EDPR’s plants in the US do not have PPA and are selling merchant with exposure to electricity and REC prices. Additionally, some plants with existing PPAs do not sell their energy where it is produced and are therefore exposed to basis risk (difference in price between the location where energy is produced and that where energy is sold). In Ontario (Canada), the selling price is defined by a long-term feed-in-tariff, thus, there is no electricity price exposure. In Brazilian operations, the selling price is defined through a public auction which is later translated into a long-term contract. Electricity price exposure is almost null, with little exposure for the production above or below the contracted production. Under EDPR’s global approach to minimize the exposure to market electricity prices, the Company evaluates on a permanent basis, if there are any deviations to the pre-defined limits (measured through EBITDA at risk, Net Income at risk and total merchant exposure). EDPR intends to eliminate Green Certificates and REC price risk with the signing of bundled PPAs with private offtakers, which include the sale of the electricity and the Green Certificate or REC. In some cases, the offtaker may be interested in contracting only the Green Certificate or the REC, thus a GCPA (Green Certificate Purchase Agreement) or a RECPA (REC Purchase Agreement) is signed. During 2016, EDPR signed new long-term PPAs in the US for 540 MW. In those geographies with remaining merchant exposure, EDPR uses various commodity-hedging instruments in order to minimize the exposure to fluctuating market prices. In some cases, due to the lack of liquidity of financial derivatives, it may not be possible to successfully hedge all existing merchant exposure, after considering PPAs in place. In 2016 EDPR financially hedged most of its remaining merchant exposure in Poland, Romania, Spain and the US. These hedges protected EDPR’s result from low electricity prices, notable in Spain during the first semester of the year and in US. As aforementioned, some US plants have exposure to REC price risk and/or basis risk (difference in electricity price between locations). EDPR hedges REC prices through forward sales and basis exposures through financial swaps or FTR (Financial Transmission Rights).  1. ii) Energy Production Risk The amount of electricity generated by EDPR’s renewable plants is dependent on weather conditions, which vary across locations, from season to season and from year to year. Variation on the amount of electricity that is generated affects EDPR’s operating results and efficiency. Not only the total wind or solar production in a specific location is relevant, but also the profile of production. Wind usually blows more at night than at daytime, when energy prices are lower and the opposite for solar. Generation profile will affect the discount or add-on in price of a plant versus a baseload generation. Finally, curtailment of a plant will also affect its production. Curtailment occurs when the production of a plant is stopped by the TSO (Transmission System Operators) for external reasons to the Company. Examples of cases of curtailment are upgrades in transmission lines or exceptional congestion (high level of electricity generation for available transmission capacity). EDPR mitigates wind and solar resource volatility and seasonality through geographical diversification of its asset base in different countries and regions.  168 168   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  EDPR acknowledges the correlation between different plants in its portfolio that allows for this geographical diversification, which enables EDPR to partially offset production variations in each region and to keep the total energy generation relatively steady. Currently, EDPR is present in 12 countries: Spain, Portugal, France, Belgium, Poland, Romania, UK (no generation), Italy, US, Canada, Brazil and Mexico. EDPR has analysed the potential use of financial products to hedge wind risk and might use this product to mitigate risk in specific cases. Profile risk and curtailment risk are managed ex-ante. For every new investment, EDPR factors the effect that expected generation profile and curtailment will have on the output of the plant. Generation profile and curtailment of EDPR’s plants are constantly monitored by EPDR’s Risk department to detect potential future changes.  1. iii) Risks related to financial markets EDPR finances its plants through project finance or corporate debt. In both cases, a variable interest rate might imply significant fluctuations in interest payments. On the other hand, due to EDPR’s presence in several countries, revenues denominated in different currencies. Consequently, exchange rate fluctuations may have a material adverse effect on financial results or on the value of the foreign investment.  1. iii) a) Interest rate risk Given the policies adopted by EDPR Group, current exposure to variable interest rate is not significant and financial cash flows are substantially independent from the fluctuation of interest rates. The purpose of interest rate risk management policies is to reduce the exposure of long-term debt cash flows to market fluctuations, mainly by contracting long term debt with a fixed rate.   When long-term debt is issued with floating rates, EDPR settles derivative financial instruments to swap from floating to fixed rate.    EDPR has a portfolio of interest-rate derivatives with maturities of up to 13 years. Sensitivity analyses of the fair value of financial instruments to interest-rate fluctuations are periodically performed.  With most of interest rate being fixed, main exposure to interest rates arises at refinancing. To protect against this risk, EDPR intends to maintain a balanced maturity profile for its corporate fixed debt, thus, diversifying the risk of bad timing when refinancing occurs. Repricing calendar of debt is continuously monitored together with interest rates in order to detect good timing for restructuring debt. Taking into account risk management policy and approved exposure limits, Global Risk Area supports the Finance team in interest rate hedging decisions and the Finance team submits the financial strategy appropriate to each project/location for Executive Committee’s approval.  1. iii) b) Exchange rate risk EDPR has international operations and is exposed to the exchange-rate risk resulting from investments in foreign subsidiaries. Currency exposure in operating plants is to U.S. dollar, Romanian leu, Polish zloty, Brazilian real, British pound and Canadian dollar. EDPR hedges risk against currency fluctuations by financing in the same currency as the revenues of the project. When local financing is not available, EDPR hedges debt cash flows though cross currency interest rate swaps. EDPR also hedges net investment (investment after deducting local debt) in foreign currency through cross currency interest rate swaps.  169  169   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Finally, EDPR contracts foreign exchange forwards to hedge the risk in specific transactions, mainly in payments to suppliers which may be denominated in different currencies. EDPR’s hedging efforts minimize exchange rate volatility, but do not eliminate completely this risk due to high costs associated to hedging FX in certain situations.  1. iii) c) Inflation risk In specific projects, regulated remuneration is linked to inflation. Additionally, O&M costs are considered to be linked to inflation in most cases. Exposure to inflation in revenues may be naturally hedged with exposure to interest rates and EDPR regularly analyses inflation exposure and its relationship with interest rates to adjust level of interest rate coverage in project finance structures. Exposure to inflation in O&M costs is managed at the moment of the investment decisions, by executing sensitivity analyses.  1. iii) d) Liquidity risk Liquidity risk is the risk of EDPR not meeting its financial obligations. Liquidity risk is mainly related to extreme market movements in electricity prices, interest or exchange rates, which may change the expected cash flow generation. EDPR tracks liquidity risk in the short term (margin calls, etc) and in the long term (financing sources) in order to meet strategic targets previously set (EBITDA, debt ratio and others). EDPR’s strategy to manage liquidity risk is to ensure that its liquidity is sufficient to meet financial liabilities when due, under both normal and stressed conditions, and without incurring unacceptable losses or risking damage to EDPR’s reputation. Different funding sources are used such as Tax Equity investors, multilateral organizations, project finance, corporate debt and asset rotation in order to ensure long-term liquidity to finance planned projects and working capital.  1. iv) Commodity price risk (other than electricity) In projects in which there is a significant number of years between investment decision and start of construction, EDPR may be exposed to the price of the materials used in turbine manufacturing, foundations and interconnection through escalation formulae included in the contracts with suppliers. In order to manage this risk, EDPR may hedge the market exposure in OTC/future commodity markets, considering the risks (potential losses) and the cost of the hedge.  2. Counterparty Risk Counterparty credit risk is the risk that the counterparty to a transaction could default before the final settlement of the transaction’s cash flows. An economic loss could occur, either a direct economic loss if the transaction has a positive value at the moment of default (counterparty credit risk) or a replacement cost due to change of the counterparty (counterparty operational risk).  2. i) Counterparty Credit Risk If the transactions or portfolio of transactions with the counterparty has a positive economic value at the time of default, an economic loss would occur.  170 170   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  To control credit risk at EDPR, thresholds of Expected Loss and Unexpected Loss are established at company level as defined under Basel Standards and re-evaluated monthly. If the threshold is surpassed by the company as a whole, mitigation measures are implemented in order to remain within the pre-established limit. Additionally, Expected Loss limits are established for each individual counterparty or Group of counterparties (parent and subsidiaries).  2. ii) Counterparty Operational Risk If the transactions or portfolio of transactions with the counterparty does not have a positive economic value at the time of default, it will impact operations. Despite no direct loss at the time of default, the replacement of the counterparty could imply a cost to EDPR due to potential delays, higher contract value with a new counterparty (replacement costs), etc. Construction and O&M subcontractors are counterparties to which EDPR is exposed from an operational point of view. To minimize the probability of incurring in potential replacement costs with counterparties, EDPR´s policy concerning counterparty operational risk is managed by an analysis of the technical capacity, competitiveness, credit quality and replacement cost of the counterparty.  3. Operational Risk 3. i) Development Risk Renewable plants are subject to strict regulations at different authority levels (international, national, state, regional and local) relating to the development, construction, grid interconnection and operation of power plants. Among other things, these laws regulate landscape and environmental aspects, building licenses, land use and land securing and access to the grid issues. While level of exigency might be different depending on the geographies, EDPR acknowledges a trend for legislations to align towards concentrating the most restrictive rules and development risks on the consenting (environmental and urban permissions) and interconnection (electricity connection of the plant to the national grid). In this context, EDPR’s experience gathered in different countries is useful to anticipate and deal with similar situations in other countries. During the development and design phase, EDPR focuses on the optimization of its projects. By mastering the variables, such as choice of locations, layout, etc, the objective is to make our projects more resilient to permitting risks. Additionally, EDPR mitigates development risk by generating optionality, with development activities in 12 different countries (Spain, Portugal, France, Belgium, Poland, Romania, UK, Italy, US, Canada, Brazil and Mexico) and a portfolio of projects in several stages of maturity. EDPR has a large pipeline of projects that provide a “buffer” to overcome potential delays in the development of prioritized projects, ensuring growth targets and being able to compensate permitting delays in some geographies.  3. ii) Execution Risk During the construction of the foundations, interconnection and substation of a plant, and the installation of the equipments, different events (bad weather, accidents, etc) might occur that could imply an over cost or a delay in the commercial operation date of the plant:   The delay implies a postponement of cash flows, affecting profitability of the investment.    When a plant has a PPA, a delay of the commercial operation date might imply the payment of LDs, with the consequent loss of revenues and the impact on annual financial results.  During the design phase, EDPR engineering teams supervise the engineering and the installation method. Construction is subcontracted to technically capable construction companies.  171  171   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  In both cases, a critical path analysis is performed to assess the reliability of construction and installation plan. Also, collaterals may be required to the counterparty following EDPR’s Counterparty Risk Policy.  3. iii) Operation Risk  Damage to Physical Assets Renewable plants in construction and in operation are exposed to weather hazards, natural disasters, etc. These risks depend on the location. All plants are insured the physical damage during construction and operation. During operation, any natural disaster, weather hazard or accident will be partially insured to revenue losses due to the event.  Equipment Performance Risk (O&M costs) Output from renewable plants depends upon the operating availability of the equipment. EDPR mitigates this risk by using a mix of suppliers which minimizes technological risk, avoiding exposure to a unique manufacturer. EDPR also engages suppliers through medium-term full-scope maintenance agreements during the first years of operation to ensure alignment with supplier in minimizing technology risk. Finally, for older plants, EDPR has created an Operation and Maintenance (O&M) program with an adequate preventive and scheduled maintenance program. EDPR externalizes non-core technical O&M activities of its renewable plants, while primary and value added activities continue to be controlled by EDPR.  3. iv) Information Technology IT (Information Technologies) risk may occur in the technical network (information network for plants operation) or in the office network (information network of corporate services: ERP, accounting…) EDPR mitigates this risk creating redundancy of servers and control centers of renewable plants. Redundancy is created in a different location to anticipate potential natural disasters, etc.  3. v) Legal claims (compliance) EDPR faces potential claims of third parties and fraud of its employees. EDPR aims strict compliance with existing regulation and has zero tolerance to fraud. EDPR revises periodically its compliance with all the regulations that affects its activity (environmental, taxes…)  3. vi) Personnel EDPR identifies two main risk factors regarding personnel: turnover and health and safety. •  Turnover: Cost of replacing an employee. A high turnover implies direct costs of replacement and indirect costs of knowledge loss.  •  Health and safety: Likelihood that a person may be harmed or suffers adverse health effects if exposed to a hazard.  EDPR mitigates turnover through constant reassessment and benchmarking of remuneration schemes in different geographies. Additionally, EDPR offers flexibility to its employees to improve work life balance. In 2016, EDPR was elected as “Great Place to Work” in Spain and Poland.  172 172   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  EDPR aims zero-accidents at work by constantly training in health and safety issues and certifying its facilities according to the OHSAS 18001 standard.  3. vii) Processes Internal processes are subject to potential human errors that may negatively affect the outcome. Internal Audit Department regularly reviews internal processes and recommends the establishment of new controls or the improvement in the implementation of existing procedures. 4. Business Risk  4. i) Regulatory Risk (renewables) The development and profitability of renewable energy projects are subject to policies and regulatory frameworks. The jurisdictions in which EDPR operates provide different types of incentives supporting energy generated from renewable sources. Remuneration schemes have become less competitive in some countries due to the financial crisis and it cannot be guaranteed that current support will be maintained in all EDPR’s geographies or that future renewable energy projects will benefit from current support measures. Regulation promoting green energy has been revised or is under revision in some of the countries where EDPR is present. In the US, renewable generation from wind will be incentivized through Production Tax Credits (PTC) at a Federal level for all projects beginning of construction up to 2019. Level of incentives will be progressively fading out. Additionally, wind and solar production is also incentivized through State RPS Programs that allow receiving RECs (Renewable Energy Credit) for each MWh of renewable generation. EDPR is managing its exposure to regulatory risks through diversification, by being present in several countries and through participation as an active member in several wind and solar associations. Regulatory Risk in each of EDPR’s countries is monitored continuously, considering current regulation, potential drafts of new laws, feedback from associations, evolution of installed renewable generation capacity and other inputs. EDPR has developed an internal quantitative assessment of Regulatory Risk that serves as an indicator for changes in supporting schemes. This measure is updated annually in all EDPR´s geographies. Regulatory Risk is also considered ex-ante, at the moment of the investment, through sensitivity analyses that are performed to evaluate its impact in project profitability under different scenarios.  4. ii) Equipment Market Risk  Equipment Price Risk Price of equipment is affected, not only by market fluctuations of the materials used, but also by the demand of this equipment. For every new project, EDPR secures the demand risk by engaging in advance with manufacturers, elected through a competitive process.  Equipment Supply Risk The demand for new plants may offset the offer of equipment. Currently, the local component requirement in some geographies (Ex: Brazil) may create this shortfall situation.  173  173   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  EDPR faces limited risk to the availability and price increase of equipment due to existing framework agreements with major global suppliers. The Company uses a large mix of suppliers in order to diversify equipment supply risk. For geographies with specific requirements of local component, EDPR does not engage in a project before securing the supply of the equipment. 5. Strategic Risk  5. i) Country Risk Country Risk is defined as the probability of occurrence of a financial loss in a given country due to macroeconomics, political or natural disasters. EDPR has defined a Country Risk Policy that assesses country risk through an internal scoring based on publicly available data. This internal scoring is compared with external assessments from renowned organizations. Each risk factor affecting country risk is evaluated independently to decide on potential mitigating actions: •  Macroeconomic Risk: Risks from the country’s economic evolution, affecting revenue or cost time of the investments;  •  Political Risk: All possible damaging actions or factors for the business of foreign companies that emanate from any political authority, governmental body or social group in the host country;  •  Natural disaster risk: Natural phenomena (seismicity, weather) that may impact negatively in the business conditions.  Before approving a project in a new geography, EDPR analyses the risk of the new country and compares it to our existing portfolio. Mitigation measures may be decided when this risk is above a certain threshold.  5. ii) Competitive landscape In the renewable business, size can be an advantage or disadvantage in specific situations. For example, in development of renewable plants, small and dynamic companies are usually more competitive than larger companies. On the other hand, when participating in tender processes for offshore wind farms, the size of the investment benefits larger companies. Additionally, the consequences of a change in the competitive landscape due to mergers and acquisitions may also be a risk. To mitigate the risks, EDPR has a clear knowledge of its competitive advantages and tries to leverage on them. When EDPR has no advantage versus its competitors, alternatives are considered in order to become competitive. For example, for offshore wind farms, EDPR has partnered with large companies with previous experience in large electricity generation projects, in order to become a more competitive consortium.  5. iii) Technology disruptions Most renewables are relatively recent technologies, which are continuously evolving and improving efficiency. As such, some initially expensive technologies can become competitive in a relatively short time. EDPR growth focuses in the most competitive renewable technologies at the moment, which are onshore wind, offshore wind and PV solar, but also participates in other innovative projects such as floating offshore wind.  5. iv) Meteorological changes Future estimations of wind and solar production are based on analysis of historical measurements for more than 20 years, and they are considered to be representative of the future. Relevant unexpected meteorological changes could lead to a lower production than the one expected from historical data.  174 174   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  When evaluating a new investment, EDPR considers potential changes in the production forecasted, however, the size of the potential deviation in the case of relevant meteorological changes is uncertain. 5. v) Investment decisions criteria Not all projects have the same risk profile. This will depend on merchant exposure of remuneration, construction risk, etc. In order to take proper business decisions, EDPR uses Risk Adjusted Metrics for investment decisions, which take into consideration the different risks inherent of each project.  5. vi) Energy Planning Assumptions in future evolution of energy markets affect the profitability of the investments for the period after the fixed remuneration (regulated tariff or PPAs). Structure of electricity markets in most of EDPR geographies (marginal setting price) were not designed to consider a great share of generation from renewable sources with zero marginal price. Thus, the increase in renewable generation could lead to lower pool prices in medium term if reforms of electricity markets are not properly undertaken. When investing, EDPR performs sensitivity analyses to stress pool price scenarios for the period without fixed remuneration to understand the robustness of the profitability of the investment.  5. vii) Corporate Organization and Governance Corporate governance systems should ensure that a company is managed in the interests of its shareholders. In particular, EDPR has an organization in place with a special focus on transparency, where the management body (Board of Directors) is separated from the supervision and control duties (Audit and Control Committee). Members of the Audit Committee are invited to the General Risk Committee of EDPR. 5. viii) Reputational risk Companies are exposed to public opinion and today’s social networks are a rapid mean to express particular opinions. A bad reputation could eventually harm financial results of a company in the short and in the long term. Sustainability makes part of the essence of EDPR. EDPR is not only committed in building a better future for our children, but also in doing it well, in an ethical and sustainable manner, consequently limiting reputational risk. 54. RISK FUNCTIONS AND FRAMEWORK A corporation can manage risks in two different ways, one risk at a time on a largely and compartmentalized basis, or all risks together within a coordinated and strategic framework. The latter approach is called “Enterprise Risk Management” and is the approach used at EDPR. Risk Management at EDPR is supported by three distinct organizational functions, each one with a different role: Strategy (Risk Profiler), Management (Risk Manager) and Controlling (Risk Controller).  175  175   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Risk functions  Description   Management – Risk management & risk business decisions  Controlling – Risk control    Responsible for proposing guidelines and policies for risk management within the company    Implement defined policies by Global Risk    Responsible for day-to-day operational decisions and for related risk taking and risk mitigating positions    Strategy – General risk strategy & policy  Global Risk Department provides analytically supported proposals to general strategic issues  Responsible for follow-up of the results of risk taking decisions and for contrasting alignment of operations with general risk policy approved by the board  The Risk Committee is the forum where the different Risk Functions discuss the policies to be implemented and control the risk exposure of the company. EDPR’s Risk Committee integrates and coordinates all Risk Functions and assures the link between corporate’s risk appetite and defined strategy and the operations of the company. EDPR created three distinct meetings of the Risk Committee in order to separate discussions on execution of mitigation strategies from those on the definition of new policies:   Restricted Risk Committee: Held every month, it is mainly focused on development risk and market risk from electricity price (market, basis, profile, GCs and RECs). It is the forum to discuss the evolution of projects under development and construction and the execution of mitigation strategies to reduce merchant exposure. It also monitors the limits of defined risk policies, with regards to counterparty risk, operational risk and country risk.    Financial Risk Committee: Held every quarter, it is held to review main financial risks and discuss the execution of mitigation strategies. Exchange rate risk, interest rate risk and credit risk from financial counterparties are most relevant risk reviewed in this committee.    Risk Committee: Held every quarter, it is the forum where new strategic analyses are discussed and new policies are proposed for approval to the Executive Committee. Additionally, EDPR’s overall risk position is reviewed, together with EBITDA@Risk and Net Income@Risk.  55. DETAILS ON THE INTERNAL CONTROL AND RISK MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS IMPLEMENTED IN THE COMPANY REGARDING THE PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING FINANCIAL INFORMATION With the purpose of not only controlling risks, but also managing them ex-ante, EDPR has created Global Risk policies that are enforceable at a Global Level. These policies are proposed and discussed in the Risk Committee and approved by the Executive Committee. Compliance with Global Risk policies is verified every month in the Restricted Risk Committee. During 2016, EDPR redefined the Enterprise Risk Management Framework for the company, framing all existing risk policies/prodedures under each Risk Category:      Market Risk: Energy Price Hedging Policy, FTR participation procedure, US Active Scheduling Procedure. Counterparty Risk: Counterparty Risk Policy. Operational Risk: Operational Risk Policy. Strategic Risk: Country Risk Policy.  INTERNAL CONTROL SYSTEM OVER FINANCIAL REPORTING EDPR has an Internal Control System over Financial Reporting (SCIRF) updated and monitored in line with international standards of Internal Control. This system covers the main aspects of the COSO framework: maintaining a control environment for the preparation of qualified financial information, assessment of the risks of financial reporting, existence of control activities to mitigate risks of error, information and communication and evaluation mechanisms.  176 176   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  SCOPE REVISION AND UPDATE The SCIRF Manual includes the annual update of the scope that aims to identify companies, areas and processes that must be included in the scope of SCIRF, according to criteria of materiality and risk, including the risk of error or fraud. The risk analysis included in the scoping process for SCIRF, includes both the different types of risk (operational, economic, financial, technological or legal) and the control objectives of financial reporting (existence and occurrence, completeness, measurement, presentation, disclosure and comparability, and rights and obligations in terms of their potential impact on the financial statements). The results of the updated scope with the methodology outlined are communicated at all levels of the organization involved in the SCIRF and supervised by the Audit and Control Committee.  CONTROL ACTIVITIES In documented SCIRF processes and controls, information capture mechanisms are established (including identification of the scope of consolidation) and steps and checks that are carried out for the preparation of the financial information that will be part of consolidated financial statements are specified. The procedures for review and approval of financial information are provided by the areas of Planning and Control, and Administration, Consolidation and Tax. Financial information is supervised in the scope of its competences by the Audit Control Committee, prior to the formulation of the accounts by the Board of Directors. The SCIRF includes control activities related to these processes, embodied in Entity Level Controls, Process Controls and General Computer Controls. These processes include review and approval activities of the financial information which are described in the processes of elaboration of individual accounts, preparation of consolidated accounts and processing of consolidated financial statements. EDPR has descriptions of Competency Profiles for the Positions to be carried out in the exercise of the main features of each position that includes a description of the main responsibilities. These include the descriptions of the key positions of those involved in the preparation of financial information. These descriptions include responsibilities in the preparation of financial information and compliance with internal control procedures. The documentation of processes and associated controls designed include among others, the completion of closure activities by completing monthly closing checklists by entity, setting time limits for the closures, the identification of the relevance of the operations in order to be reviewed at the appropriate level, conducting analytical reviews of financial information, the existence of limitations in systems to prevent erroneous records or access by unauthorized persons, analysis of deviations from the budget, the analysis in Executive Committees of relevant and significant facts that could cause a significant impact on the accounts, or the allocation of responsibilities for calculating amounts to be provisioned for them to be carried out by authorized personnel with the right skills. In addition to the mentioned processes, major transactional processes resulting from the scope are documented. The description of the activities and controls are designed with the aim of ensuring the registration, evaluation, appropriate presentation and disclosure of transactions in financial reporting. Control activities of EDPR’s SCIRF also include those relating to systems and information technology (Computer General Controls) following an international reference, the COBIT framework (Control Objectives for Information and related Technologies). The importance of this area is that information systems are the tools with which financial information is prepared, and is therefore relevant for transactions conducted with them. These control activities include those related to access control to applications and systems, segregation of duties, management of corrective and preventive maintenance, new projects implementation, administration and management of the systems, facilities and operations (back-ups, security incidents) and their proper monitoring and planning. These activities are developed taking into account the requirements of control and supervision. Among the activities of SCIRF’s scope update, there is a periodic analysis of the existence of service suppliers that perform relevant activities in relation to the processes of preparing financial information.  177  177   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  SCIRF SUPERVISION The Audit and Control Committee supervises the SCIRF in the scope of the exercise of their activities through the monitoring and supervision of the developed mechanisms for SCIRF’s implementation, evolution and evaluation, and the results of the scope analysis and the extent of the situation in terms of coverage. To this extent, the Internal Audit Department assists the Audit and Control Committee. EDPR has an Internal Audit Department under the Chairman of the Executive Committee. The Audit and Control Committee supervise the Internal Audit Department as establishes the Basic Internal Audit Act. The main functions of the Internal Audit Department are set out in the Basic Internal Audit Act, which includes, among others, the evaluation of the activities of internal control systems, including the internal control system over financial reporting. The annual work plans of the Internal Audit Department obtain the opinion of the Audit and Control Committee. The Internal Audit Department reports to the Audit and Control Committee about the status and the performance of the audit works. Among these activities, Internal Audit supports the Audit and Control Committee in supervising the implementation and maintenance of SCIRF and reports the results of the evaluation, improvement actions identified and their evolution. The entity has action plans for improvement actions identified in SCIRF’s assessment processes, which are accompanied and supervised by the Internal Audit Department, considering their impact on the financial information. Also in the year 2016, as in previous years, a process of self-certification was made by the heads of the various process owners regarding proper documentation update on SCIRF controls and processes in their area of responsibility and the implementation of controls with corresponding evidence.  SCIRF EVALUATION Besides the monitoring and evaluation activities described in the preceding paragraph, in case the auditors identified internal control weaknesses in the scope of their financial audit work, they are expected to communicate these circumstances to the Audit and Control Committee, which regularly monitors the results of the audit work. Additionally, in 2016 the EDPR Group decided to have its SCIRF audited by the external auditor. As a result of its evaluation, the external auditor issued a report with a favorable opinion on the SCIRF of the EDPR Group, according to ISAE 3000 (International Standard on Assurance Engagements 3000).  IV. INVESTOR ASSISTANCE  56. INVESTOR RELATIONS DEPARTMENT EDPR seeks to provide to shareholders, investors, and stakeholders all the relevant information about the Company and its business environment, on a regular basis. The promotion of transparent, consistent, rigorous, easily accessible, and high‑quality information is of fundamental importance to an accurate perception of the Company’s strategy, financial situation, accounts, assets, prospects, risks, and significant events. EDPR, therefore, looks to provide investors with accurate information that can support them in making informed, clear and concrete investment decisions. The Investor Relations Department was created to ensure a direct and permanent contact with all market related agents and stakeholders, to guarantee effective communication, equality between shareholders and to prevent imbalances in the information access. The EDPR Investor Relations Department (IR) is the intermediary between EDPR and its actual and potential shareholders, the financial analysts that follow Company’s activity, all investors and other members of the financial  178 178   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  community. The main purpose of the department is to guarantee the principle of equality among shareholders, by preventing asymmetries in the access of the information and reducing the gap between market perception and Company’s strategy and intrinsic value. The department responsibility comprises developing and implementing EDPR’s communication strategy and preserving an appropriate institutional and informative relationship with the financial market, the stock exchange at which EDPR shares trade and the regulatory and supervisory entities (CMVM – Comissão de Mercado de Valores Mobiliários – in Portugal and CNMV – Comisíon Nacional del Mercado de Valores – in Spain). EDPR is clearly aware of the importance of detailed and transparent information, delivered on-time to the market. Consequently, EDPR publishes Company’s price sensitive information before the opening or following the closing of the NYSE Euronext Lisbon stock exchange through CMVM’s information system and, simultaneously, make that same information available on the website investors’ section and through the IR department’s mailing list. In 2016, EDPR made 30 press releases, including quarterly, semi-annual and annual results presentations and handouts elaborated by the IR Department. In addition, the IR Department also elaborates key data files and interim presentations which are available on the website investors’ section. On each earnings announcement, EDPR promotes a conference call and webcast, at which the Company’s management updates the market on EDPR’s activities. On each of these events, shareholders, investors and analysts had the opportunity to directly submit their questions and to discuss EDPR’s results as well as the Company’s outlook and strategy. EDPR IR Department is coordinated by Rui Antunes and is located at the Company’s head offices in Madrid, Spain. The department structure and contacts are as follows:  IR Contacts: Rui Antunes, Head of Planning & Control, Investor Relations and Sustainability Calle Serrano Galvache, 56 Centro Empresarial Parque Norte Edificio Olmo – 7th floor 28033 – Madrid – España Website: www.edprenovaveis.com/investors E-Mail: ir@edpr.com Phone: +34 902 830 700 / Fax: +34 914 238 428  In 2016, EDPR promoted and participated in several events, namely roadshows, conferences, presentations to investors and analysts, meetings and conference calls. During the year, EDPR management and the IR team attended to 16 broker conferences, held 29 roadshows and reverse roadshows, along with conference calls and meetings, totaling more than 380 interactions with institutional investors in more than 15 of the major financial cities across Europe and US. EDPR IR Department was in permanent contact with capital markets agents, namely financial analysts who evaluate the Company. In 2016, as far as the Company is aware, sell‑side analysts issued more than 150 reports evaluating EDPR’s business and performance. At the end of the 2016, as far as the Company is aware of, there were 24 institutions elaborating research reports and following actively EDPR activity. As of December 31st 2016, the average price target of those analysts was of Euro 7.3 per share with the majority reporting “Buy” recommendations on EDPR’s share: 14 Buys, 8 Neutrals and 2 Sell.  179  179   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Company Axia Bank of America Merrill Lynch BBVA Berenberg BPI Bryan, Garnier & Co Caixa BI Citigroup  Analyst  Price Target  Date  Recommendation  Maria Almaça  € 8.30  24-Aug-16  Buy  Pinaki Das  € 8.00  03-May-16  Buy  Daniel Ortea  € 7.25  15-Dec-16  Outperform  Lawson Steele  € 6.60  10-Feb-16  Hold  Gonzalo SanchezBordoña  € 7.80  21-Nov-16  Buy  Xavier Caroen  € 7.50  06-Apr-16  Neutral  Helena Barbosa  € 7.70  26-Jul-16  Buy  Akhil Bhattar  € 6.50  12-Dec-16  Neutral  Deutsche Bank  Virginia Sanz de Madrid  € 7.60  14-Dec-16  Buy  Exane BNP  Manuel Palomo  € 6.20  03-Nov-16  Underperform  Daniel Rodríguez  € 5.78  18-Dec-14  Hold  Manuel Losa  € 6.80  30-Nov-16  Neutral  Grupo CIMD  António Seladas  € 6.30  26-Jul-16  Reduce  Haitong  Jorge Guimarães  € 8.20  27-Jul-16  Buy  Pablo Cuadrado  € 7.70  27-May-16  Buy  Javier Garrido  € 6.70  20-Dec-16  Overweight  Kepler Cheuvreux  Jose Porta  € 8.30  27-Jul-16  Buy  Macquarie  Jose Ruiz  € 5.90  14-Dec-16  Neutral  Carolina Dores  € 8.00  4-Nov-16  Overweight  Philippe Ourpatian  € 6.90  27-Jul-16  Neutral  Felipe Echevarría  € 8.20  10-Oct-16  Buy  Santander  Bosco Mugiro  € 7.80  26-May-16  Buy  Société Générale  Jorge Alonso  € 7.00  4-Nov-16  Hold  Hugo Liebaert  € 9.00  18-Oct-16  Buy  Fidentiis Goldman Sachs  HSBC JP Morgan  Morgan Stanley Natixis Sabadell  UBS  57. MARKET RELATIONS REPRESENTATIVE EDPR representative for relations with the market is Rui Antunes, Head of Planning & Control, Investor Relations and Sustainability Department.  58. INFORMATION REQUESTS In 2016, EDPR was present in several events with analysts and investors, such as roadshows, conferences, meetings, conference calls and other presentations, communicating EDPR’s business plan, strategy and its operational and financial performance. During the year, IR Department received more than 550 information requests and interacted more than 380 times with institutional investors. On average, information requests were replied in less than 24 hours, with complex requests being replied within one week time. As of December 31st 2016 there was no pending information request.  180 180   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  V. WEBSITE – ONLINE INFORMATION  59-65. EDPR considers online information a powerful tool in the dissemination of material information, updating its website with all the relevant documents. Apart from all the required information by CMVM and CNMV regulations, EDPR website also carries financial and operational updates of Company’s activities ensuring an easy access to the information. EDPR website: www.edprenovaveis.com Information:  Link:  Company information  www.edprenovaveis.com/investors/corporate-governance/companys-name www.edprenovaveis.com/our-company/who-we-are  Corporate by-laws and bodies/committees regulations  www.edprenovaveis.com/investors/corporate-governance  Members of the corporate bodies  www.edprenovaveis.com/investors/corporate-governance/directors  Market relations representative, IR department  www.edprenovaveis.com/investors/contact-ir-team  Means of access  www.edprenovaveis.com/our-company/contacts/contact-us  Financial statements documents  www.edprenovaveis.com/investors/reports-and-results  Corporate events Agenda  www.edprenovaveis.com/investors/calendar  General Shareholders’ Meeting information  www.edprenovaveis.com/investors/shareholders-meeting-2  181  181   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  D. Remuneration  I. POWER TO ESTABLISH  66. COMPETENCES TO DETERMINE THE REMUNERATION OF THE CORPORATE BODIES The Nominations and Remunerations Committee is a permanent body belonging to the Board of Directors with an informative and advisory nature. Its recommendations and reports are non-binding. As such, the Nominations and Remunerations Committee has no executive functions. The main functions of the Nominations and Remunerations Committee are to assist and inform the Board of Directors regarding the nominations (including by co-option), re-elections, dismissals, and the remuneration of the Board Members and its position about the composition of the Board of Directors, as well as the nominations, remuneration, and dismissal of senior management personnel. The Nominations and Remunerations Committee is the body responsible for proposing to the Board of Directors the determination of the remuneration of the Executive management of the Company; the Declaration on Remuneration Policy; the evaluation and compliance of the KPI’s (Key Performance Indicators); the annual and multi annual variable remuneration, if applicable, and also proposes the remuneration of the Non-Executive Directors and members of the Board Committees. The Board of Directors is responsible for the approval of the above-mentioned proposals except concerning the Declaration on the Remuneration Policy. The Declaration on the Remuneration Policy is submitted by the Board of Directors to the approval of the General Shareholders’ Meeting as an independent proposal. According to the Company’s Articles of Association the Board of Directors remuneration is subject to a maximum value that can only be modified by a Shareholders agreement.  II. REMUNERATION COMMITTEE  67. NOMINATIONS AND REMUNERATIONS COMMITTEE The Composition of the Nominations and Remunerations Committee is reflected on topic 29 of the report. The Nominations and Remunerations Committee did not hire any external consultancy services corresponding to 2016.  68. KNOWLEDGE AND EXPERIENCE REGARDING REMUNERATION POLICY The Chairman of the Nominations and Remunerations Committee has knowledge and experience regarding Remuneration Policy as member of the Remuneration Committee of a Portuguese listed company as mentioned on his biography available in the Annex of this report, together with the biographies of all other members of the Nominations and Remunerations Committee.  182 182   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  III. REMUNERATION STRUCTURE  69. REMUNERATION POLICY Pursuant to Article 26.1 of the Company’s Articles of Association the Directors shall be entitled to a remuneration which consists of (i) a fixed amount to be determined annually by the General Shareholders’ Meeting for the whole Board of Directors and of (ii) attendance fees regarding the Board Meetings. The above-mentioned article also establishes the possibility of the Directors being remunerated with Company shares, share options, or other securities granting the right to obtain shares or by means of share-indexed remuneration systems. In any case, the system chosen must be approved by the General Shareholders’ Meeting and comply with current legal provisions. The total amount of the remunerations that the Company will pay to its Directors under the terms provided in the previous paragraphs shall not exceed the amount determined for that effect by the General Shareholders’ Meeting. The maximum remuneration approved by the General Shareholders’ Meeting, for all the members of the Board of Directors was EUR 2,500,000 per year. Pursuant to Article 26.4 of the Company’s Articles of Association, the rights and duties of any kind derived from the condition of Board Member shall be compatible with any other rights and obligations either fixed or variable that could correspond to the Board Members as a consequence of other employment or professional engagements, if any, carried out in the Company. Variable remuneration resulting from said contracts or from any other relationship, including being a Board Member, will be limited to a maximum annual amount to be established by the General Shareholders’ Meeting. The maximum annual remuneration approved by the General Shareholders’ Meeting for the variable remuneration for all the executive members of the Board of Directors was EUR 1,000,000 per year. EDPR, in line with EDP Group corporate governance practice, has signed an Executive Management Services Agreement with EDP, under which the Company bears the cost for such services to some of the members of the Board of Directors to the extent their services are devoted to EDPR. The Non-Executive Directors only receive a fixed remuneration, which is calculated on the basis of their work exclusively as Directors or with their membership on the Nominations and Remunerations Committee, Related Party Transactions Committee, and the Audit and Control Committee. Those members who are seated in two different Committees do not accumulate two remunerations. In these cases, the remuneration to be received is the one that corresponds to the highest value. EDPR has not incorporated any share remuneration or share purchase options plans as components of the remuneration of its Directors. No Director has entered into any contract with the Company or third parties that have the effect of mitigating the risk inherent in the variability of the remuneration established by the Company. In EDPR there are not any payments for the dismissal or termination of Director's duties. The remuneration policy for the Directors of the Company is submitted each year to the General Shareholders’ Meeting for approval.  70. REMUNERATION STRUCTURE The remuneration policy applicable for 2014-2016 as proposed by the Nominations and Remuneration Committee and approved by the General Shareholders’ Meeting on April 8th, 2014 (the Remuneration Policy), defines a structure with a fixed remuneration for all members of the Board of Directors and a variable remuneration, with an annual component and a multi-annual component for the members of the Executive Committee. The Remuneration Policy, including the minor amendments approved by the General Shareholders’ Meeting held on April 14th 2016, remained unaltered through 2016. On the topic below can be found a reminder of the KPIs (Key Performance Indicators) stated in the Remuneration Policy for variable annual and multi-annual variable components.  183  183   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  71. VARIABLE REMUNERATION Variable annual and multi-annual remuneration applies to the members of the Executive Committee. The variable annual remuneration may range from 0 to 68% of the annual fixed remuneration and the multi-annual remuneration from 0 to 120% of the annual fixed remuneration. For Executive Committee Members that are also Officers, there will be a qualitative evaluation of the CEO about the annual performance. This evaluation will have a weight of 20% for the final calculation in the annual variable remuneration and 32% in the multi-annual variable remuneration. The other 80% will be calculated based on the weights indicated in the next paragraph for the annual variable remuneration and 68% for the multi-annual variable. The key performance indicators (KPIs) used to determine the amounts of the annual and multi-annual variable remuneration regarding to each year of the term are aligned with the strategic grounds of the Company: growth, risk control and efficiency. These are the same for all members of the Executive Committee, although with specific targets for the platforms in the case of COOs. For the year 2016 and in order to align the indicators with the company objectives, some minor amendments were applied to some KPIs. The indicators are as follows:  CEO/CFO/Non-Officers Executives Weight Group Platform 2016  Target Group  Key performance Indicator  Growth  Incremental MW (EBITDA+ENEOP)  10%  30%  SelfFunding Strategy  Asset Rotation + Tax Equity  10%  Risk Return  ROIC Cash % TSR vs. Wind peers & PSI 20 EBITDA (in €) Net Profit (excl. Minorities)  Efficiency Additional KPIs  Technical Availability Opex /Av. EBITDA MW (in €k) Capex /MW (in €k) Sustainability Employee Satisfaction Appreciation of the Remuneration Committee  COOs* Weight 2016  Group  Platform  70%  10%  30%  70%  100%  0%  7.5%  100%  0%  8% 15% 15% 12.5%  50% 100% 50% 100%  50% 0% 50% 0%  8% 15% 12% 12%  50% 100% 50% 100%  50% 0% 50% 0%  6%  40%  60%  6%  40%  60%  0%  0%  0%  6%  0%  100%  6%  50%  50%  6%  50%  50%  7.5% 5%  100% 100%  0% 0%  7.5% 5%  100% 100%  0% 0%  5%  100%  0%  5%  100%  0%  100.0%  100.0%  * For the COO´s regarding these KPIs the annual and multiannual are both calculated using the Group achievement, that weights 100%.  According to the Remuneration Policy approved by the General Shareholders’ Meeting, the maximum variable remuneration (annual and multi-annual) is applicable if all the above mentioned KPI’s were achieved and the performance evaluation is equal or above 110%.  72. MULTI-ANNUAL REMUNERATION The Remuneration Policy incorporates the deferral for a period of three years of the multi-annual variable remuneration, being the relevant payment conditioned to the lack of any willful illicit action, known after the appraisal and which endangers the sustainable performance of the company, in line with CMVM corporate governance practices.  73. VARIABLE REMUNERATION BASED ON SHARES EDPR has not allocated variable remuneration on shares and does not maintain Company shares that the Executive Directors have had access to.  184 184   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  74. VARIABLE REMUNERATION BASED ON OPTIONS EDPR has not allocated variable remuneration on options. 75. ANNUAL BONUS AND NON-MONETARY BENEFITS The key factors and grounds for any annual bonus scheme are described on topics 71 and 72. Additionally, the Officers, with the exception of the CEO received the following non-monetary benefits: company car and Health Insurance. In 2016, the non-monetary benefits amounted to EUR 117,159. The Non-Executive Directors do not receive any relevant non-monetary benefits as remuneration. 76. RETIREMENT SAVINGS PLAN The retirement savings plan for the members of the Executive Committee that are also Officers, acts as an effective retirement supplement with a range between 3% to 6% of their annual salary. The percentage is defined according with the retirement savings plan applicable in their home country. The retirement savings plan has been approved by the General Shareholders’ Meeting on April 14th 2016 (the Remuneration Policy included the retirement plan).  185  185   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  IV. REMUNERATION DISCLOSURE  77. BOARD OF DIRECTORS REMUNERATION The remuneration paid by EDPR to the members of the Board of Directors for the year ended on December 31st 2016 was as follows: Fixed (€)  Annual (€)  Multiannual (€)  Total (€)  0  0  0  0  João Paulo Costeira**  61,804.00  0  0  61,804.00  Miguel Amaro**  61,804.00  0  0  61,804.00  Gabriel Alonso**  0  0  0  0  António Mexia*  0  0  0  0  Nuno Alves*  0  0  0  0  João Lopes Raimundo  60,000.00  0  0  60,000.00  António Nogueira Leite  55,000.00  0  0  55,000.00  João Manuel de Mello Franco  60,000.00  0  0  60,000.00  Jorge Henriques dos Santos  80,000.00  0  0  80,000.00  Gilles August  45,000.00  0  0  45,000.00  Manuel Menéndez Menéndez  45,000.00  0  0  45,000.00  Acácio Jaime Liberado Mota Piloto  55,000.00  0  0  55,000.00  José A. Ferreira Machado  60,000.00  0  0  60,000.00  Francisca Guedes de Oliveira  55,000.00  0  0  55,000.00  Allan J.Katz  45,000.00  0  0  45,000.00  Francisco Seixas da Costa***  39,263.89  0  0  39,264.89  722,871.89  0  0  722,871.89  Remuneration Executive Directors João Manso Neto*  Non-Executive Directors  Total  * António Mexia, João Manso Neto and Nuno Alves do not receive any remuneration from EDPR. EDPR and EDP signed an Executive Management Services Agreement according to which EDPR pays to EDP a fee for the services rendered by these Board Members. ** Gabriel Alonso, Miguel Amaro and João Paulo Costeira, as Officers and members of the Executive Committee receive their remuneration as Directors as described on the table above and as other Group companies’ employees, as described on the table below. *** Francisco Seixas da Costa amounts reflect the ones corresponding to the 2016 period since his appointment.  According to the Executive Management Services Agreement signed with EDP, EDPR is due to pay an amount to EDP, for the services rendered by the Executive Managers and the Non-Executive Managers. The amount due under said Agreement for the management services rendered by EDP in 2016 is EUR 1,132,017.60, of which EUR 1,087,017 refers to the management services rendered by the Executive Members and EUR 45,000 to the management services rendered by the Non-Executive Members. The retirement savings plan for the members of the Executive Committee, excluding the Officers, acts as an effective retirement supplement and corresponds to 5% of their annual salary. The Non-Executive Directors may opt between a fixed remuneration or attendance fees per meeting, in a value equivalent to the fixed remuneration proposed for a Director, taking into consideration the duties carried out.  186 186   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  78. REMUNERATION FROM OTHER GROUP COMPANIES The total remuneration of the Officers, ex-CEO, was the following:  Fixed  Variable Annual  Variable Multiannual  Total  João Paulo Costeira  € 228,196  € 95,000  -  € 323,196  Miguel Amaro  € 228.196  € 90,000  -  € 318,196  Gabriel Alonso  US$ 366,544.62  US$ 116,550  -  US$ 483,094.62  Remuneration  All the amounts are in EUR, except Gabriel Alonso ones, which are in USD.  79. REMUNERATION PAID IN FORM OF PROFIT SHARING AND/OR BONUS PAYMENTS In EDPR there is no payment of remuneration in the form of profit sharing and/or bonus payments and the reasons for said bonuses or profit sharing being awarded.  80. COMPENSATION FOR RESIGNED BOARD MEMBERS In EDPR there is no compensation paid or owed to former executive Directors concerning contract termination during the financial year.  81. AUDIT AND CONTROL COMMITTEE REMUNERATION  Member  Position  Remuneration (€)*  Jorge Santos  Chairman  80,000  João Manuel de Mello Franco  Vocal  60,000  João Lopes Raimundo  Vocal  60,000  * The Non-Executive Directors receive only a fixed remuneration, which is calculated based on their work exclusively as Directors or with their membership on the Nominations and Remunerations Committee, Related-Party Transactions Committee, and/or the Audit and Control Committee.  82. REMUNERATION OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE GENERAL SHAREHOLDERS’ MEETING In 2016, the remuneration of the Chairman of the General Shareholders’ Meeting of EDPR was EUR 15,000.  V. AGREEMENTS WITH REMUNERATION IMPLICATION  83-84. EDPR has no agreements with remuneration implication.  187  187   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  VI. SHARE-ALLOCATION AND/OR STOCK OPTION PLANS  85-88. EDPR does not have any Share-Allocation and/or Stock Option Plans.  188 188   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  E. Related-Party Transactions  I. CONTROL MECHANISMS AND PROCEDURES  89. RELATED-PARTY TRANSACTIONS CONTROLLING MECHANISMS In order to supervise the transactions between the Group Companies and its qualified shareholders, the Board of Directors has created the Related-Party Transactions Committee, a permanent body with delegated functions. The Related-Party Transactions Committee duties are described on topic 29 of the Report. The Audit and Control Committee also supervises the transactions with qualified shareholders when requested by the Board of Directors according to Article 8.2, i) of its Regulations. This information is included on the annual report of the Audit and Control Committee. The mechanisms established on both committees’ regulations and also the fact that one of the members of the RelatedParty Transactions Committee is member of the Audit and Control Committee constitutes a relevant element for an adequate evaluation of the relations established between EDPR and third entities.  90. TRANSACTIONS SUBJECT TO CONTROL DURING 2016 During 2016, EDPR has not signed any contracts with the members of its corporate bodies or with holders of qualifying holdings, excluding EDP, as mentioned below. The contracts signed between EDPR and its related parties have been analyzed by the Related-Party Transactions Committee according to its competences, as mentioned on the previous topic, and have been concluded according to the market conditions. The total amount of supplies and services in 2016 incurred with or charged by the EDP Group was EUR 18.64 million, corresponding to 6.1% of the total value of Supplies & Services for the year (EUR 304.74 million). The most significant contracts in force during 2016 are the following:  FRAMEWORK AGREEMENT The framework agreement was signed by EDP and EDPR on May 7th 2008 and came into effect when the latter was admitted to trading. The purpose of the framework agreement is to set out the principles and rules governing the legal and business relations existing when it came into effect and those entered into subsequently. The framework agreement establishes that neither EDP nor the EDP Group companies other than EDPR and its subsidiaries can engage in activities in the field of renewable energies without the consent of EDPR. EDPR shall have worldwide exclusivity, with the exception of Brazil, where it shall engage its activities through a joint venture with EDP Energias do Brasil S.A., for the development, construction, operation, and maintenance of facilities or activities related to wind, solar, wave and/or tidal power, and other renewable energy generation technologies that may be developed in the future. Nonetheless, the agreement excludes technologies being developed in hydroelectric power, biomass, cogeneration, and waste in Portugal and Spain. It lays down the obligation to provide EDP with any information that it may request from EDPR to fulfil its legal obligations and prepare the EDP Group’s consolidated accounts. The framework agreement shall remain in effect for as long as EDP directly or indirectly owns more than 50% of the share capital of EDPR or appoints more than 50% of its Directors.  189  189   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  EXECUTIVE MANAGEMENT SERVICES AGREEMENT On November 4th 2008 EDP and EDPR signed an Executive Management Services Agreement that was renewed on May 4th 2011 and effective from March 18th 2011 and renewed again on May 10th 2012. Through this contract, EDP provides management services to EDP Renováveis, including matters related to the day-today running of the Company. Under this agreement EDP appoints four people from EDP to be part of EDPR’s Management: (i) two Executive Managers which are members of the EDPR Executive Committee, including the CEO, and (ii) two Non-Executive Managers, for which EDP Renováveis pays EDP an amount defined by the Related Party Committee, and approved by the Board of Directors and the Shareholders Meeting. Under this contract, EDPR incurred an amount of EUR 1,132,017.60 for the management services rendered in 2016.  FINANCE AGREEMENTS AND GUARANTEES The most significant finance agreements between EDP Group companies and EDPR Group companies were established under the above-described Framework Agreement and currently include the following:  LOAN AGREEMENTS EDPR and EDPR Servicios Financieros SA (as the borrower) have loan agreements with EDP Finance BV and EDP Servicios Financieros España (as the lender), companies 100% owned by EDP Energias de Portugal S.A. Such loan agreements can be established both in EUR and USD, up to 10-year tenor and are remunerated at rates set at an arm’s length basis. As of December 31st 2016, such loan agreements totalled USD 1,472,783,052 and EUR 1,209,000,000.  CURRENT ACCOUNT AGREEMENT EDPR Servicios Financieros (EDPR SFE) and EDP Servicios Financieros España (EDP SFE) signed an agreement through which EDP SFE manages EDPR SFE’s cash accounts. The agreement also regulates the current account (cc) scheme on arm’s length basis. As of December 31st 2016, there are two different current accounts with the following balance and counterparties:   in USD, for a total amount of USD 205,910,661 in favor of EDPR SFE;    in EUR, for a total amount of EUR 10,867,725 in favor of EDP SFE.  The agreements in place are valid for one year as of date of signing and are automatically renewed for equal periods.  COUNTER-GUARANTEE AGREEMENT A counter-guarantee agreement was signed, under which EDP or EDP Energias de Portugal S.A., Sucursal en España (hereinafter guarantor or EDP Sucursal) undertakes on behalf of EDPR, EDP Renewables Europe SLU (hereinafter EDPR EU), and EDP Renewables North America LLC (hereinafter EDPR NA) to provide corporate guarantees or request the issue of any guarantees, on the terms and conditions requested by the subsidiaries, which have been approved on a case by case basis by the EDP’s Executive Board. EDPR will be jointly liable for compliance by EDPR EU and EDPR NA. The subsidiaries of EDPR undertake to indemnify the guarantor for any losses or liabilities resulting from the guarantees provided under the agreement and to pay a fee established in arm’s length basis. Nonetheless, certain guarantees issued prior to the date of approval of these agreements may have different conditions. As of December 31st 2016, such counter-guarantee agreements totalled EUR 14,001,170 and USD 165,060,000. The counter-guarantee agreement signed, under which EDP Energias do Brasil, SA or EDPR were undertaking on behalf of EDPR Brasil, to provide corporate guarantees or request the issue of any guarantees, on the terms and conditions requested by the subsidiaries, is no longer applicable and only the guarantees issued beforehand still in place until their expiring date. As of December 31st 2016, such counter-guarantee agreements totalled BRL 342,225,047.  190 190   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  CROSS CURRENCY INTEREST RATE SWAPS Due to the net investment in EDPR NA, EDPR Canada, EDPR Brazil, and Polish companies, EDPR’s accounts were exposed to the foreign exchange risk. With the purpose of hedging this foreign exchange risk, EDPR Group companies settled the following Cross Currency Interest Rate Swap (CIRS). As of December 31st 2016, the total amount of CIRS by geography and currency are as following:   in USD/EUR, with EDP Sucursal for a total amount of USD 2,619,281,096;    in CAD/EUR, with EDP Energias de Portugal SA for a total amount of CAD 27,550,000 (NDF);    in BRL/EUR, with EDP Energias de Portugal SA for a total amount of BRL 118,000,000 (NDF);    in PLN/EUR, with EDP Energias de Portugal SA for a total amount of PLN 835,212,469.  HEDGE AGREEMENTS – EXCHANGE RATE EDPR Group companies entered into several hedge agreements with EDP Energias de Portugal S.A., with the purpose of managing the transaction exposure related to the short term or transitory positions in Polish subsidiaries, fixing the exchange rate for PLN/EUR and EUR/PLN in accordance to the prices in the forward market in each contract date. As of December 31st 2016, the total amount of Forwards and Non Delivery Forwards by geography and currency are as following:   Polish operations, for EUR/PLN, a total amount of PLN 206,379,992 (FWDs);    Polish operations, for PLN/EUR, a total amount of EUR 454,443 (FWDs).  HEDGE AGREEMENTS – COMMODITIES EDP and EDPR EU entered into hedge agreements for 2016 for a total volume of 3,663,080 MWh (sell position) and 131,280 MWh (buy position) at the forward market price at the time of execution related with the expected sales of energy in the Spanish market.  CONSULTANCY SERVICE AGREEMENT On June 4th 2008, EDP and EDPR signed a consultancy service agreement. Through this agreement, and upon request by EDPR, EDP (or through EDP Sucursal) shall provide consultancy services in the areas of legal services, internal control systems, financial reporting, taxation, sustainability, regulation and competition, risk management, human resources, information technology, brand and communication, energy planning, accounting and consolidation, corporate marketing, and organizational development. The price of the agreement is calculated as the cost incurred by EDP plus a margin. For the first year, it was fixed at 8% based on an independent expert on the basis of market research. For 2016 the estimated cost of these services is EUR 5,486,410.27. This was the total cost of services provided for EDPR, EDPR EU, and EDPR NA. The duration of the agreement is one (1) year tacitly renewable for equal periods.  RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT On May 13th 2008, EDP Inovação S.A. (hereinafter EDP Inovação), an EDP Group Company, and EDPR signed an agreement regulating relations between the two companies regarding projects in the field of renewable energies (hereinafter the R&D Agreement). The object of the R&D Agreement is to prevent conflicts of interest and foster the exchange of knowledge between companies and the establishment of legal and business relationships. The agreement forbids EDP Group companies other than EDP Inovação to undertake or invest in companies that undertake the renewable energy projects described in the agreement.  191  191   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  The R&D Agreement establishes an exclusive right on the part of EDP Inovação to project and develop new renewable energy technologies that are already in the pilot or economic and/or commercial feasibility study phase, whenever EDPR exercises its option to undertake them. The fee corresponding to this agreement in 2016 is EUR 734,115.29. The agreement shall remain in effect for as long as EDP directly or indirectly maintains control of more than 50% of both companies or appoint the majority of the members of the Board and Executive Committee of the parties to the agreement.  MANAGEMENT SUPPORT SERVICES AGREEMENT BETWEEN EDP RENOVÁVEIS PORTUGAL S.A., AND EDP VALOR – GESTÃO INTEGRADA DE RECURSOS S.A. On January 1st 2003, EDPR - Promoção e Operação S.A., and EDP Valor – Gestão Integrada de Recursos S.A. (hereinafter EDP Valor), an EDP Group Company, signed a management support service agreement. The object of the agreement is the provision to EDPR – Promoção e Operação S.A. by EDP Valor of services in the areas of procurement, economic and financial management, fleet management, property management and maintenance, insurance, occupational health and safety, and human resource management and training. The remuneration paid to EDP Valor by EDPR Promoção e Operação S.A. and its subsidiaries for the services provided in 2016 totaled EUR 935,530. The initial duration of the agreement was five (5) years from date of signing on January 1st 2008, and tacitly renewable for equal periods of one (1) year. Either party may renounce the contract with one (1) year’s notice.  INFORMATION TECHONOLOGY MANAGEMENT SERVICES AGREEMENT BETWEEN EDP RENOVÁVEIS S.A. AND EDP ENERGIAS DE PORTUGAL S.A. On January 1st 2010 EDPR and EDP signed an IT management services agreement. The object of the agreement is to provide to EDPR the information technology services described on the contract and its attachments by EDP. The amount incurred for the services provided in 2016 totaled EUR 670,244.98. The initial duration of the agreement is one (1) year from date of signing and it is tacitly renewed for a new period of one (1) year. Either party may renounce the contract with one (1) month notice.  CONSULTANCY AGREEMENT BETWEEN EDP RENOVÁVEIS BRASIL S.A., AND EDP ENERGIAS DO BRASIL S.A. The object of the agreement is to provide to EDP Renováveis Brasil S.A. (hereinafter EDPR Brasil) the consultancy services described on the contract and its attachments by EDP – Energias do Brasil S.A. (hereinafter EDP Brasil). Through this agreement, and upon request by EDPR Brasil, EDP Brasil shall provide consultancy services in the areas of legal services, internal control systems, financial reporting, taxation, sustainability, regulation and competition, risk management, human resources, information technology, brand and communication, energy planning, accounting and consolidation, corporate marketing, and organizational development. The amount incurred by EDP Brasil for the services provided in 2016 totaled BRL 134,746. The initial duration of the agreement is one (1) year from the date of signing and it is tacitly renewed for a new period of one (1) year.  192 192   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  91. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROCEDURES APPLICABLE TO THE SUPERVISORY BODY FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF THE BUSINESS DEALS The most significant contracts signed between EDPR and its Qualified Shareholders are analyzed by the Related-Party Transactions Committee according to its competences, as mentioned on topic 89 of the report and by the Audit and Control Committee when requested. According to Article 9.1 g) of the Related-Party Transactions Committee Regulations, the Committee analyses and supervises, according to the necessities of each specific case, the transactions between Qualifying Holdings other than EDP with entities from the EDP Renováveis Group whose annual value is superior to EUR 1,000,000. This information is included on the annual report of the Audit and Control Committee regarding those cases whose previous opinion was requested. The mechanisms established on both committees regulations and also the fact that one of the members of the Related-Party Transactions Committee is a member of the Audit and Control Committee constitutes a relevant element for an adequate evaluation of the relations established between EDPR and third entities.  II. DATA ON BUSINESS DEALS  92. DETAILS OF THE PLACE WHERE THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS INCLUDING INFORMATION ON BUSINESS DEALINGS WITH RELATED PARTIES ARE AVAILABLE, IN ACCORDANCE WITH IAS 24, OR ALTERNATIVELY A COPY OF SAID DATA The information on business dealings with related parties is available on Note 37 of the Financial Statements.  193  193   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  PART II – CORPORATE GOVERNANCE ASSESSMENT 1. DETAILS OF THE CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CODE IMPLEMENTED According to article 2 of CMVM Regulation 4/2013, EDPR informs that the present Report has been drafted under the Recommendations of CMVM’s Corporate Governance Code published on July 2013. The CMVM Corporate Governance Code and its Regulations are available at CMVM website, www.cmvm.pt.  2. ANALYSIS OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE CORPORATE GOVERNANCE CODE IMPLEMENTED The following table shows the CMVM recommendations set forth in the code and indicates EDPR’s compliance with it and the place in this report in which they are described in more detail. During 2016 EDPR continued its consolidation task as to the Company’s governance principles and practices. The high level of compliance with the best governance practices by EDPR was once again recognized by an initiative of Deloitte, the UK-based financial services firm, that rewards the best investor relations performance among companies listed on Euronext Lisbon: the annual IRG Awards Gala. The criteria for this awards included knowledge of the business and industry, implementation of best practices, display of communication skills and strategic vision, and contribution to the overall performance of the market. EDPR once again, has been awarded for the Best Annual Report in the non-financial sector at the Investor Relations & Governance Awards, which took place July 5th in Lisbon, for excellence in accuracy, transparency, thoroughness and clarity. Also in order to comply with the Recommendation II.2.5 of the Portuguese Corporate Governance Code, and according to the results of the reflection made by the Nominations and Remunerations Committee, the governance model that was adopted has been ensuring an effective performance and articulation of EDPR Social Bodies and proved to be adequate to the Company’s governance structure without any constraints to the performance of its checks and balances system adopted to justify the changes made in the governance practices of EDPR. The explanation of CMVM’s recommendations that EDPR does not adopt or that the Company deems not applicable, reasoning and other relevant comments as well as reference to the part of the report where the description may be found, are in the table below. In this context, EDPR states that it has adopted the CMVM recommendations on the governance of listed companies provided in the Portuguese Corporate Governance Code, with the exceptions indicated below.  #.#.  CMVM RECOMMENDATIONS  Statement of compliance I.  VOTING AND CORPORATE CONTROL  I.1.  Companies shall encourage shareholders to attend and vote at general meetings and shall not set an excessively large number of shares required for the entitlement of one vote, and implement the means necessary to exercise the right to vote by mail and electronically.  Adopted  Chapter B – I, b), topic 12 and 13 I.2. Adopted  Companies shall not adopt mechanisms that hinder the passing of resolutions by shareholders, including fixing a quorum for resolutions greater than that provided for by law.  Chapter B – I, b), topic 14 I.3. Adopted  Companies shall not establish mechanisms intended to cause mismatching between the right to receive dividends or the subscription of new securities and the voting right of each common share, unless duly justified in terms of long-term interests of shareholders.  Chapter B – I, b) topic 14  194 194   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  #.#.  CMVM RECOMMENDATIONS  Statement of compliance I.4.  Not Applicable  The Company’s articles of association that provide for the restriction of the number of votes that may be held or exercised by a sole shareholder, either individually or in concert with other shareholders, shall also foresee for a resolution by the General Assembly (5 year intervals), on whether that statutory provision is to be amended or prevails – without super quorum requirements as to the one legally in force – and that in said resolution, all votes issued be counted, without applying said restriction.  Chapter A – I, topic 5 I.5. Adopted  Measures that require payment or assumption of fees by the Company in the event of change of control or change in the composition of the Board and that which appear likely to impair the free transfer of shares and free assessment by shareholders of the performance of Board Members, shall not be adopted.  Chapter A – I, Topic 2 and 4  II.  SUPERVISION, MANAGEMENT AND OVERSIGHT  II.1.  SUPERVISION AND MANAGEMENT  II.1.1.  Within the limits established by law, and except for the small size of the Company, the board of Directors shall delegate the daily management of the Company and said delegated powers shall be identified in the Annual Report on Corporate Governance.  Adopted  Chapter B – II, Topic 21, 28 and 29 II.1.2. Adopted  The Board of Directors shall ensure that the Company acts in accordance with its objectives and shall not delegate its responsibilities as regards the following: i) define the strategy and general policies of the Company, ii) define business structure of the group, iii) decisions considered strategic due to the amount, risk and particular characteristics involved.  Chapter B- II, Topic 29 II.1.3.  Not Applicable  The General and Supervisory Board, in addition to its supervisory duties , shall take full responsibility at corporate governance level, whereby through the statutory provision or by equivalent means, shall enshrine the requirement for this body to decide on the strategy and major policies of the Company, the definition of the corporate structure of the group and the decisions that shall be considered strategic due to the amount or risk involved. This body shall also assess compliance with the strategic plan and the implementation of key policies of the Company.  (The governance model adopted by EDPR, as it is compatible with its personal law, corresponds to the so-called “Anglo-Saxon” model set forth in the Portuguese Commercial Companies Code, in which the management body is a Board of Directors, and the supervision and control duties are of the responsibility an Audit and Control Committee.) II.1.4.  Except for small-sized companies, the Board of Directors and the General and Supervisory Board, depending on the model adopted, shall create the necessary committees in order to: a) Ensure a competent and independent assessment of the performance of the executive Directors and its own overall performance, as well as of other committees;  Adopted  b) Reflect on the system structure and governance practices adopted, verify its efficiency and propose to the competent bodies, measures to be implemented with a view to their improvement.  Chapter B – II, C), Topic 27, 28 and 29 II.1.5. Adopted  The Board of Directors or the General and Supervisory Board, depending on the applicable model, should set goals in terms of risk-taking and create systems for their control to ensure that the risks effectively incurred are consistent with those goals.  Chapter B – III, C), III – Topic 52, 53, 54 and 55 II.1.6. Adopted  The Board of Directors shall include a number of Non-Executive members ensuring effective monitoring, supervision and assessment of the activity of the remaining members of the board.  Chapter B – II, Topic 18 and Topic 29  195  195   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  #.#.  CMVM RECOMMENDATIONS  Statement of compliance II.1.7.  Non-Executive members shall include an appropriate number of independent members, taking into account the adopted governance model, the size of the Company, its shareholder structure and the relevant free float. The independence of the members of the General and Supervisory Board and members of the Audit Committee shall be assessed as per the law in force. The other members of the Board of Directors are considered independent if the member is not associated with any specific group of interests in the Company nor is under any circumstance likely to affect an exempt analysis or decision, particularly due to: a. Having been an employee at the Company or at a Company holding a controlling or group relationship within the last three years; b. Having, in the past three years, provided services or established commercial relationship with the Company or Company with which it is in a control or group relationship, either directly or as a partner, board member, manager or Director of a legal person; c. Being paid by the Company or by a Company with which it is in a control or group relationship besides the remuneration arising from the exercise of the functions of a board member; d. Living with a partner or a spouse, relative or any first degree next of kin and up to and including the third degree of collateral affinity of Board Members or natural persons that are direct and indirectly holders of qualifying holdings; e. Being a qualifying shareholder or representative of a qualifying shareholder.  Adopted Chapter B – II, Topic 18 II.1.8. Adopted  When Board Members that carry out executive duties are requested by other Board Members, said shall provide the information requested, in a timely and appropriate manner to the request.  Chapter B – II, C) - Topic 29 II.1.9. Adopted  The Chair of the Executive Board or of the Executive Committee shall submit, as applicable, to the Chair of the Board of Directors, the Chair of the Supervisory Board, the Chair of the Audit Committee, the Chair of the General and Supervisory Board and the Chairperson of the Financial Matters Board, the convening notices and minutes of the relevant meetings.  Chapter B – II, C) - Topic 29 II.1.10.  If the chair of the board of Directors carries out executive duties, said body shall appoint, from among its members, an independent member to ensure the coordination of the work of other Non-Executive members and the conditions so that Not said can make independent and informed decisions or to ensure the existence of an equivalent mechanism for such applicable coordination.  (The Chairperson of EDPR’s Board of Directors does not have executive duties) Chapter B – II, A) – Topic 18  II.2  SUPERVISION  II.2.1.  Depending on the applicable model, the Chair of the Supervisory Board, the Audit Committee or the Financial Matters Committee shall be independent in accordance with the applicable legal standard, and have the necessary skills to carry out their relevant duties.  Adopted  Chapter B – II – Topic 18; Chapter B – II, C) - Topic 29; and Chapter B – III, A) – Topic 32 II.2.2. Adopted  The supervisory body shall be the main representative of the external auditor and the first recipient of the relevant reports, and is responsible, inter alia, for proposing the relevant remuneration and ensuring that the proper conditions for the provision of services are provided within the Company.  Chapter B – C), Topic 29; and Chapter B – V, Topic 45 II.2.3. Adopted  The supervisory board shall assess the external auditor on an annual basis and propose to the competent body its dismissal or termination of the contract as to the provision of their services when there is a valid basis for said dismissal.  Chapter B – II, Topic 29; Chapter B – III, C) – Topic 38; and Chapter B – III – V, Topic 45 II.2.4. Adopted  The supervisory board shall assess the functioning of the internal control systems and risk management and propose adjustments as may be deemed necessary.  Chapter B – II, Topic 29; and Chapter B – III, C) – III II.2.5.  The Audit Committee, the General and Supervisory Board and the Supervisory Board shall decide on the work plans and resources concerning the internal audit services and services that ensure compliance with the rules applicable to the Company (compliance services), and should be recipients of reports made by these services at least when it concerns matters related to accountability, identification or resolution of conflicts of interest and detection of potential improprieties.  Adopted Chapter B – II, Topic 29  196 196   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  #.#.  CMVM RECOMMENDATIONS  Statement of compliance II.3.  REMUNERATION SETTING  II.3.1.  All members of the Remuneration Committee or equivalent should be independent from the Executive Board Members and include at least one member with knowledge and experience in matters of remuneration policy.  Adopted  Chapter D – II – Topic 29, 67 and 68 II.3.2.  Adopted  Any natural or legal person that provides or has provided services in the past three years, to any structure under the Board of Directors, the Board of Directors of the Company itself or who has a current relationship with the Company or consultant of the Company, shall not be hired to assist the Remuneration Committee in the performance of their duties. This recommendation also applies to any natural or legal person that is related by employment contract or provision of services with the above.  Chapter D – II – Topic 67 II.3.3.  A statement on the remuneration policy of the management and supervisory bodies referred to in Article 2 of Law No. 28/2009 of 19 June, shall also contain the following: a) Identification and details of the criteria for determining the remuneration paid to the members of the governing bodies; b) Information regarding the maximum potential, in individual terms, and the maximum potential, in aggregate form, incurred to members of corporate bodies, and identify the circumstances whereby these maximum amounts may be payable;  Adopted  c) Information regarding the enforceability or unenforceability of payments for the dismissal or termination of appointment of Board Members.  Chapter D – III – Topic 69 II.3.4. Not Applicable  Approval of plans for the allotment of shares and/or options to acquire shares or based on share price variation to Board Members shall be submitted to the General Meeting. The proposal shall contain all the necessary information in order to correctly assess said plan.  Chapter V – III, Topic 73 and 85-88 II.3.5. Adopted  Approval of any retirement benefit scheme established for members of corporate members shall be submitted to the General Meeting. The proposal shall contain all the necessary information in order to correctly assess said system.  Chapter D – III, Topic 76  III.  REMUNERATION  III.1. Adopted  The remuneration of the executive members of the board shall be based on actual performance and shall discourage taking on excessive risk-taking.  Chapter D – III, Topic 69, 70, 71 and 72 III.2. Adopted  The remuneration of Non-Executive Board Members and the remuneration of the members of the supervisory board shall not include any component whose value depends on the performance of the Company or of its value.  Chapter D – III, Topic 69; and Chapter D – IV, Topic 77 III.3. Adopted  The variable component of remuneration shall be reasonable overall in relation to the fixed component of the remuneration and maximum limits should be set for all components.  Chapter D – III, Topic 71 and 72 III.4. Adopted  A significant part of the variable remuneration should be deferred for a period not less than three years, and the right of way payment shall depend on the continued positive performance of the Company during that period.  Chapter D – III, Topic 72 III.5. Adopted  Members of the Board of Directors shall not enter into contracts with the Company or with third parties which intend to mitigate the risk inherent to remuneration variability set by the Company.  Chapter D – III, Topic 69  197  197   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  #.#.  CMVM RECOMMENDATIONS  Statement of compliance III.6. Not Applicable  Executive Board Members shall maintain the Company's shares that were allotted by virtue of variable remuneration schemes, up to twice the value of the total annual remuneration, except for those that need to be sold for paying taxes on the gains of said shares, until the end of their mandate.  Chapter D – III, Topic 73 III.7. When the variable remuneration includes the allocation of options, the beginning of the exercise period shall be deferred Not for a period not less than three years. Applicable Chapter D – III, Topic 74 III.8. Adopted  When the removal of board member is not due to serious breach of their duties nor to their unfitness for the normal exercise of their functions but is yet due on inadequate performance, the Company shall be endowed with the adequate and necessary legal instruments so that any damages or compensation, beyond that which is legally due, is unenforceable.  Chapter D – III, Topic 69 and 72  IV.  AUDITING  IV.1.  The external auditor shall, within the scope of its duties, verify the implementation of remuneration policies and systems of the corporate bodies as well as the efficiency and effectiveness of the internal control mechanisms and report any shortcomings to the supervisory body of the Company.  Adopted  Chapter B – III – V, Topic 45 IV.2.  Adopted  The Company or any entity with which it maintains a control relationship shall not engage the external auditor or any entity with which it finds itself in a group relationship or that incorporates the same network, for services other than audit services. If there are reasons for hiring such services - which must be approved by the supervisory board and explained in its Annual Report on Corporate Governance - said should not exceed more than 30% of the total value of services rendered to the Company.  Chapter B – III – V, Topics 37 and 46 IV.3. Adopted  Companies shall support auditor rotation after two or three terms whether four or three years, respectively. Its continuance beyond this period must be based on a specific opinion of the supervisory board that explicitly considers the conditions of auditor’s independence and the benefits and costs of its replacement.  Chapter B – III – V, Topic 44  V.  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST AND RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS  V.1.  The Company's business with holders of qualifying holdings or entities, with which they are in any type of relationship pursuant to article 20 of the Portuguese Securities Code, shall be conducted during normal market conditions.  Adopted  Chapter B – C), Topic 90 V.2. Adopted  The supervisory or oversight board shall establish procedures and criteria that are required to define the relevant level of significance of business with holders of qualifying holdings - or entities with which they are in any of the relationships described in article 20/1 of the Portuguese Securities Code – thus significant relevant business is dependent upon prior opinion of that body.  Chapter B – C), Topic 89 and 91  VI.  INFORMATION  VI.1. Adopted  Companies shall provide, via their websites in both the Portuguese and English languages, access to information on their progress as regards the economic, financial and governance state of play.  Chapter B – C) – V, Topics 59-65 VI.2. Adopted  Companies shall ensure the existence of an investor support and market liaison office, which responds to requests from investors in a timely fashion and a record of the submitted requests and their processing, shall be kept.  Chapter B – C) – IV, Topic 56  198 198   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  ANNEX Professional Qualifications and Biographies of the Members of the Board of Directors  António Mexia Born: 1957 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Chairman of the Board of Directors of EDP Renováveis SA • Chairman and CEO of the Executive Board of Directors of EDP - Energias de Portugal, SA • Permanent Representative of EDP Energias de Portugal SA, Sucursal en España, and Representative of EDP Finance BV • Chairman of the Board of Directors of EDP Energias do Brasil, SA • Member of the Board of Directors of Fundação EDP Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Directors of Banco Comercial Português (BCP) • President of the Board of Directors of Union de l’Industrie Electrique - EURELECTRIC Other previous positions: • Minister of Public Works, Transport and Communication for Portugal’s 16th Constitutional Government • Chairman of the Portuguese Energy Association (APE) • Executive Chairman of Galp Energia • Chairman of the Board of Directors of Petrogal, Gás de Portugal, Transgás and Transgás-Atlântico • Vice-Chairman of the Board of Directors of Galp Energia • Director of Banco Espírito Santo de Investimentos • Vice-Chairman of the Board of Directors of ICEP (Portuguese Institute for Foreign Trade) • Assistant to the Secretary of State for Foreign Trade • Assistant Lecturer in the Department of Economics at Université de Genève (Switzerland) Education: • BSc in Economics from Université de Genève (Switzerland) • Postgraduate lecturer in European Studies at Universidade Católica  João Manso Neto Born: 1958 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Executive Vice-Chairman of the Board of Directors and Chairman of the Executive Committee (CEO) of EDP Renováveis SA • Chairman of the Board of Directors of EDP Renewables Europe SLU, EDP Renováveis Brasil SA and EDP Renováveis Servicios Financieros SA • Executive Director of EDP Energias de Portugal SA • Director of EDP Energía Gás SL • Member of the Board of Directors of EDP Energia Ibérica SA, Hidroeléctrica del Cantábrico SA, Naturgás Energia Grupo SA • Permanent Representative of EDP Energias de Portugal SA Sucursal en España, and Representative of EDP Finance BV • Chairman of the Board of Directors of EDP Gás.com Comércio de Gás Natural SA Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of the Operador del Mercado Ibérico de Energía, Polo Español (OMEL) • Member of the Board of OMIP – Operador do Mercado Ibérico (Portugal), SGPS, SA • Member of the Board of MIBGAS Main positions in the last five years: • Member of the Executive Board of Directors of EDP Energias de Portugal SA • Chairman of EDP Gestão da Produção de Energia SA • CEO and Vice-Chairman of Hidroeléctrica del Cantábrico SA • Vice-Chairman of Naturgás Energia Grupo SA • Member of the Board of the Operador del Mercado Ibérico de Energía, Polo Español (OMEL) • Member of the Board of OMIP – Operador do Mercado Ibérico (Portugal) SGPS SA Other previous positions: • Head of the International Credit Division, and General Manager responsible for Financial and South Retail areas at Banco Português do Atlântico  199 199   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART THE NEWART  • General Manager of Financial Management, General Manager of Large Corporate and Institutional Businesses, General Manager of the Treasury, Member of the Board of Directors of BCP Banco de Investimento and Vice-Chairman of BIG Bank Gdansk in Poland- at Banco Comercial Português • Member of the Board of Banco Português de Negócios • General Manager and Member of the Board of EDP Produção Education: • Degree in Economics from Instituto Superior de Economia • Post-graduate degree in European Economics from Universidade Católica Portuguesa • Professional education course through the American Bankers Association (1982), the academic component of the Master’s Degree program in Economics at the Faculty of Economics, Universidade Nova de Lisboa • Advanced Management Program for Overseas Bankers at the Wharton School in Philadelphia  NUNO ALVES Born: 1958 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Directors of EDP Renóvaveis SA • Member and CFO of the Executive Board of Directors of EDP - Energias de Portugal, SA • Chairman of the Board of Directors of EDP Imobiliária e Participações SA, Energia RE SA, Sãvida Medicina Apoiada SA, SCS Serviços Complementares de Saúde, SA • Member of the Board of Directors of EDP - Energias do Brasil, S.A. and member of the Board of Directors of Hidroeléctrica del Cantábrico SA • Permanent Representative and Member of the Executive Committee of EDP Energias de Portugal SA Sucursal en España • Manager of EDP IS – Investimentos e Serviços, SU Lda • Representative of relations with the Market and CMVM of EDP - Energias de Portugal, SA  Main positions in the last five years: • Member of the Executive Board of Directors and CFO of EDP - Energias de Portugal, SA • Representative of EDP Finance BV Other previous positions: • In 1988, he joined the Planning and Strategy Department of Millennium BCP • Associate Director of the Millennium BCP bank’s Financial Investments Division • Investor Relations Officer for the Millennium BCP Group • Coordinating Manager of Millennium BCP Retail network • Head of the Capital Markets Division of Millennium BCP Investimento • Co-Head of Millennium BCP Investment Banking Division • Chairman and CEO of CISF Dealer, the brokerage arm of Millennium BCP Investimento • General Manager of Millennium BCP • Executive Board Member of Millennium BCP Investimento, responsible for BCP Group Treasury and Capital Markets Education: • Degree in Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering • Master in Business Administration by the University of Michigan  GABRIEL ALONSO Born: 1973 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Directors, Member of the Executive Committee and Chief Operating Officer for North America of EDP Renováveis SA • CEO of EDP Renewables North America LLC • Chief Executive Officer and Sole Manager of the EDPR NA subsidiaries • Chief Executive Officer and Director of the Canadian entities • President of Vientos de Coahuila, S.A. de CV Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Directors and of the Executive Committee of the American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) Main positions in the last five years: • (none) Other previous positions: • He joined EDP in early 2007 as Managing Director for North America • Chief Development Officer (CDO) and Chief Operating Officer (COO) of EDPR NA Education: • Law Degree and a Master of Science Degree in Economics, each from the University of Deusto in Spain • Advanced Management Program at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business  200 200   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  JOÃO PAULO COSTEIRA Born: 1965 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Directors, Member of the Executive Committee and Chief Operating Officer for Europe & Brazil of EDP Renováveis SA • Chairman of the Board of Directors of EDP Renewables Italia SRL, EDP Renewables France Holding SA, EDP Renewables SGPS SA, EDP Renewables South Africa Ltd, EDP Renováveis Portugal SA, EDPR PTParques Eólicos SA, EDPR PT Promoção e Operação SA, ENEOP 2 SA, Greenwind SA and South Africa Wind & Solar Power SLU • Director of EDP Renewables Europe SL, EDP Renewables Polska SP zoo, EDP Renewables Romania SRL, EDP Renewables UK Ltd, EDP Renováveis Brasil SA and EDP Renováveis Servicios Financieros SL Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • (none) Main positions in the last five years: • (none) Other previous positions: • Commercial Director of Portgás • General Manager of Lisboagás (Lisbon’s Natural Gás LDC), Managing Director of Transgás Industria (Liberalized wholesale customers), and Managing Director of Lusitaniagás (Natural gas LDC) at Galpenergia Group (Portugal’s National Oil & Gas Company) • Member of the Management Team of GalpEmpresas and Galpgás • Executive Board Member for Natural Gas Distribution and Marketing (Portugal and Spain) Education: • Degree in Electrical Engineering by the Faculdade Engenharia da Universidade do Porto • Master in Business Administration by IEP/ESADE (Oporto and Barcelona) • Executive Development Program at École des HEC (Université de Lausanne) • Strategic Leadership Development Program at INSEAD (Fontainebleau) • Advanced Management Program of IESE (Barcelona)  MIGUEL DIAS AMARO Born: 1967 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • CFO, Member of the Board of Directors and Member of the Executive Committee of EDP Renováveis SA • Member of the Board of Directors of EDP Renewables Canada, Ltd., EDP Renováveis Servicios Financieros, S.L., EDP Renewables Polska SP. Z O.O, EDP Renewables UK Ltd, EDP Renewables, SGPS, SA, EDP Renováveis Portugal, SA, EDP Renewables Europe, SL , EDPR PT – Parques Eólicos SA, and EDPR PT – Promoção e Operação, SA Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • (none) Main positions in the last five years: • Board Member, CFO and COO Distribution of EDP – Energias do Brasil Other previous positions: • Head of Corporate Internal Audit at Portugal Telecom • Assistant to the CEO at Portugal Telecom • Senior Financial Analyst at Telecommunications Sector at Espírito Santo BM • Assistant to the Secretary of State for Treasury and Finance • Financial Analyst – Retail and Pulp and Paper Sectors at Espírito Santo Dealer Education: • MBA at Universidade Nova de Lisboa • Mechanical Engineering degree, by the Instituto Superior de Engenharia de Lisboa (ISEL) • Bachelor in Mechanical Engineering by the Instituto Superior de Engenharia de Lisboa (ISEL)  JOÃO LOPES RAIMUNDO Born: 1960 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Directors of EDP Renováveis SA • Member of the Audit and Control Committee of EDP Renováveis SA Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • Member of the CAE of Montepio Holding SA • Member of the CAE of Caixa Económica Montepio Geral (“CEMG”) • Chairman of Montepio Investimento SA  201 201   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  Main positions in the last five years: • Member of the Board of Directors of CIMPOR - Cimentos de Portugal, SGPS SA • Managing Director of Millennium BCP’s Investment Banking Division • CEO and Board Member of Millennium BCP Capital SA • Chairman of the Board of BCP Holdings (USA), Inc. • General Manager of Banco Comercial Português • Member of the Board of OMIP – Operador do Mercado Ibérico (Portugal), SGPS SA • Member of the Investment Committees of the Fundo Revitalizar Norte, FCR (managed by Explorer Investments, SCR SA), Fundo Revitalizar Centro, FCR (Managed by Oxy Capital, SCR, SA) and Fundo Revitalizar Sul, FCR (Managed by Capital Criativo, SCR SA) • Member of the CAE of Montepio Recuperação de Crédito ACE Other previous positions: • Senior auditor of BDO—Binder Dijker Otte Co. • Director of Banco Manufactures Hanover (Portugal) SA • Member of the Boards of TOTTAFactor SA (Grupo Banco Totta e Açores) and Valores Ibéricos, SGPS SA In 1993, held positions with Nacional Factoring, da CISF - Imóveis and CISF Equipamentos • Director of CISF - Banco de Investimento • Member of the Board of Directors of Leasing Atlântico, Comercial Leasing, Factoring Atlântico, Nacional Leasing and Nacional Factoring • Member of the Board of Directors of BCP Leasing, BCP Factoring and Leasefactor SGPS • Chairman of the Board of Directors of Banque BCP (Luxemburg) • Chairman of the Executive Committee of Banque BCP (France) • Member of the Board of Banque Privée BCP (Switzerland) • General Manager of BCP’s Private Banking Division • Member of the Board of Directors of Banco Millennium BCP de Investimento SA • General Manager of Banco Comercial Português SA • Vice-Chairman of the General Assembly Board of Millennium Angola • Vice-Chairman and CEO of Millennium BCP Bank NA (USA) Education: • BSc in Business Administration from Universidade Católica Portuguesa • Master in Business Administration from INSEAD  JOÃO MANUEL DE MELLO FRANCO Born: 1946 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Directors of EDP Renováveis SA • Chairman of the Nominations and Remunerations Committee of EDP Renováveis SA • Member of the Audit and Control Committee of EDP Renováveis SA Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Villas Boas ACP – Corretores de Seguros, SA • Member of the Board of ACP – Mediação de Seguros, SA Main positions in the last five years: • Chairman of the Audit Committee of Sporting Clube de Portugal-Futebol SAD • Chairman of the Board of Directors of Portugal Telecom SGPS, SA • Chairman of the Audit Committee, Member of the Corporate Governance Committee, Member of the Evaluation Committee and Member of the Remuneration Committee of Portugal Telecom SGPS SA Other previous positions: • Member of the Board of Directors of Tecnologia das Comunicações, Lda • Chairman of the Board of Directors of Telefones de Lisboa e Porto SA • Chairman of Associação Portuguesa para o Desenvolvimento das Comunicações • Chairman of the Board of Directors of Companhia Portuguesa Rádio Marconi • Chairman of the Board of Directors of Companhia Santomense de Telecomunicações e da Guiné Telecom • Vice-Chairman of the Board of Directors and CEO of Lisnave (Estaleiros Navais) SA • CEO and Chairman of the Board of Directors of Soponata • Director and Member of the Audit Committee of International Shipowners Reinsurance Co SA • Vice-Chairman of José de Mello Imobiliária SGPS SA Education: • BSc in Mechanical Engineering from Instituto Superior Técnico de Lisboa • Certificate in strategic management and company boards • Holder of a grant of Junta de Energia Nuclear  202  61   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  JORGE SANTOS Born: 1951 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Directors of EDP Renováveis SA • Chairman of the Audit and Control Committee of EDP Renováveis SA Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • Full Professor of ISEG, University of Lisbon • Director at “Fundação Económicas” • Member of the “Conselho Diretivo” of the “Fundação do Centro Cultural de Belém” • Coordinator of the Master Program in Economics of ISEG Main positions in the last five years: • President of the Economics Department of Instituto Superior de Economia e Gestão of the Universidade de Lisboa (ISEG) • President of the General Assembly of IDEFE Other previous positions: • Coordinator of the committee for evaluation of the EC Support Framework II • Member of the committee for the elaboration of the ex-ante evaluation of the EC Support Framework III. From 1998 to 2000 • Chairman of the research unit “Unidade de Estudos sobre a Complexidade na Economia (UECE)” • Chairman of the scientific council of Instituto Superior de Economia e Gestão (ISEG) of the Universidade de Lisboa • Coordinator of the committee for the elaboration of the Strategic Programme of Economic and Social Development for the Peninsula of Setúbal Education: • Degree in Economics from Instituto Superior de Economia e Gestão • Master degree (MSc) in Economics from the University of Bristol • PhD in economics from the University of Kent • Doctorate Degree in Economics from the Instituto Superior de Economia e Gestão of Universidade de Lisboa  MANUEL MENÉNDEZ MENÉNDEZ Born: 1960 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Directors of EDP Renováveis SA • Chairman of the Board of Directors of Hidroeléctrica del Cantábrico SA Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • CEO of Liberbank SA Main positions in the last five years: • Chairman and CEO of Liberbank SA • Chairman of Banco de Castilla-La Mancha • Chairman of Cajastur • Chairman of Hidroeléctrica del Cantábrico SA • Chairman of Naturgás Energía Grupo SA • Member of the Board of Directors of EDP Renewables Europe SLU • Representative of Peña Rueda, SL in the Board of Directors of Enagas SA • Member of the Board of Confederación Española de Cajas de Ahorro (CECA) • Member of the Board of UNESA Other previous positions: • University Professor in the Department of Business Administration and Accounting at the University of Oviedo Education: • BSc in Economics and Business Administration from the University of Oviedo • PhD in Economic Sciences from the University of Oviedo  GILLES AUGUST Born: 1957 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Directors of EDP Renováveis SA  Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Fondation Chirac • Lawyer and founder of August Debouzy Law Firm • Lecturer at École Supérieure des Sciences Economiques et Commerciales, at Collège de Polytechnique and at CNAM (Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers)  62  203   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  Main positions in the last five years: • Lawyer and founder of August Debouzy Law Firm Other previous positions: • Lawyer at Finley, Kumble, Wagner, Heine, Underberg, Manley & Casey Law Office in Washington DC • Associate and later became Partner at Baudel, Salés, Vincent & Georges Law Firm in Paris • Partner at Salés Vincent Georges • Knight of thé Légion d'Honneur and Officer in thé Ordre National du Mérite Education: • Master in Laws from Georgetown University Law Center in Washington DC (1986) • Post-graduate degree in Corporate Law from University of Paris II Phantéon, DEA (1984) • Master in Private Law from the same University (1981) • Graduated from the École Supérieure des Sciences Economiques et Commerciales (ESSEC)  ACÁCIO PILOTO Born: 1957 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Directors of EDP Renováveis SA • Member of the Nominations and Remunerations Committee of EDP Renováveis SA • Member of the Related-Party Transactions Committee of EDP Renováveis SA Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • Member of the Supervisory Board and Chairman of the Risk Committee of Caixa Económica Montepio Geral Main positions in the last five years: • Member of the Board of Directors and Member of the Audit Committee of INAPA IPG SA • Millennium BCP General Manager responsible for the Asset Management business • CEO of Millennium Gestão de Activos SGFIM • Chairman of Millennium SICAV • Chairman of BII International Other previous positions: • International Division of Banco Pinto e Sotto Mayor • International and Treasury Division of Banco Comercial Português • Head of International Corporate Banking • Head of Treasury and Capital Markets Division at CISF- Banco de Investimento (BCP investment bank) • Seconded to the Groups Subsidiary in charge of Asset Management, AF Investimentos, joining its Executive Committee and acting as Chairman of the following group companies: AF Investimentos, Fundos Mobiliários; AF Investimentos, Fundos Imobiliários; BPA Gestão de Patrimónios; BCP Investimentos International; AF Investimentos International and Prime International and member of the Executive Committee • Executive Board Member of BCP - Banco de Investimento, in charge of Investment Banking • Head of Treasury and Capital Markets of BCP – Banco de Investimento Education: • Law degree by the Law School of Lisbon University • During 1984 and 1985 he was a scholar from the Hanns Seidel Foundation, Munich were he obtained a Post- Graduation in Economic Law by Ludwig Maximilian University • Post- Graduation in European Community Competition Law by Max Planck Institut • Trainee at the International Division of Bayerische Hypoteken und Wechsel Bank • Professional education courses, mostly in banking and financial management, namely the International Banking School (Dublin, 1989), the Asset and Liability Management Seminar (Merrill Lynch International) and the INSEAD Executive Program (Fontainebleau)  ANTÓNIO NOGUEIRA LEITE Born: 1962 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Directors of EDP Renováveis SA • Member of the Nominations and Remunerations Committee of EDP Renováveis SA Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board at HipogesIberia--Advisory, SA • Director of Sagasta, STC, SA • Member of the Advisory Committee at Incus Capital Advisors • Vice-President of “Fórum para a Competitividade” • Chairman of the Board at Forum Oceano Main positions in the last five years: • Group Caixa Geral de Depósitos (Portugal’s largest banking group) • Vice-Chairman of the Executive Committee of Caixa Geral de Depósitos SA • Chairman of the Board at Caixa Banco de Investimento SA, Caixa Capital SCR SGPS SA, Caixa Leasing e Factoring SA, Partang SGPS SA  204  63   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  • Group José de Mello (one of Portugal’s leading private groups) • Director of José de Mello Investimentos and General Manager of José de Mello SGPS SA • Director of Companhia União Fabril CUF SGPS SA, Quimigal SA (2002-2006), CUF - Químicos Industriais SA, ADP SA – CUF – Adubos, SEC SA, Brisa SA, Efacec Capital SGPS SA, Comitur SGPS SA, Comitur Imobiliária SA, José de Mello Saúde SGPS SA • Chairman of the Board of OPEX SA (2003 -2011) • Member of the Advisory Council of IGCP, Portugal’s National Debt Agency, (2002-2011) Other previous positions: • Director of Soporcel SA (1997-1999) • Director of Papercel SGPS SA (1998-1999) • Director of MC Corretagem SA (1998-1999) • Chairman of the Board, Lisbon Stock Exchange (1998-9) • Secretary of State for Treasury and Finance and Alternate Governor (IMF, EBRD, EIB, WB) • Member of the Economic and Financial Committee of the European Union Education: • Degree, Universidade Católica Portuguesa, 1983 • Masters of Science in Economics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign • PhD in Economics, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign  JOSÉ FERREIRA MACHADO Born: 1957 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of Directors of EDP Renováveis SA • Chairman of the Related-Party Transactions Committee of EDP Renováveis SA Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • Pro Vice Chancellor and Dean of the Faculty of Business and Management of Regent’s University London Main positions in the last five years: • Professor of Economics, Associate Professor, Assistant Professor and Teaching Assistant at Nova SBE • Visiting Assisting Professor at University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign • Consultant at GANEC • Op-ed columnist at O So • Dean of Nova School of Business and Economics (Nova SBE), Universidade Nova de Lisboa Other previous positions: • Associate Dean at Nova SBE • Consultant for the Research Department at Banco de Portugal • Member of the Advisory Board of Instituto de Gestão de Crédito Público Education: • Degree in Economics by Universidade Técnica de Lisboa • Agregacão (Habilitation) in Statistics and Econometrics by Universidade Nova de Lisboa • PhD in Economics by the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign  ALLAN J. KATZ Born: 1947 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of EDP Renováveis S.A.  Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • Founder of the American Public Square • Executive Committee Chair of the Academic and Corporate Board to ISCTE Business School in Lisbon Portugal • Board member of the International Relation Council of Kansas City • Board Member of the WW1 Commission Diplomatic Advisory Board • Distinguished Professor, University of Missouri at Kansas City • Creator of Katz, Jacobs and Associates, LLC (KJA) • Frequent speaker and moderator on developments in Europe and on American Politics Main positions in the last five years: • Ambassador of the United States of America to the Republic of Portugal Other previous positions: • National Director of the Public Policy practice group at the firm of Akerman Senterfitt • Assistant Insurance Commissioner and Assistant State Treasurer for the State of Florida • Legislative counsel to Congressman Bill Gunter and David Obey  64  205   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  • • • • • • •  ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  General Counsel to the Commission on Administrative Review of the US House of Representatives Member of the Board of the Florida Municipal Energy Association President of the Brogan Museum of Art & Science in Tallahassee, Florida Board member of the Junior Museum of Natural History in Tallahassee, Florida First Chair of the State Neurological Injury Compensation Association Member of the State Taxation and Budget Commission City of Tallahassee Commissioner  Education: • BA from UMKC in 1969 • JD from Washington College of Law at American University in Washington DC in 1974  FRANCISCA GUEDES DE OLIVEIRA Born: 1973 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of EDP Renováveis SA • Member of the Related-Party Transactions Committee of EDP Renováveis SA  Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • Associate Dean at Católica Porto Business School (responsibility of Faculty Management) • Associate Dean for the Master Programmes at Católica Porto Business School Main positions • Coordinator of • Coordinator of • Coordinator of  in the last five years: the MSc programme in Business Economics at Católica Porto Business School the seminars in economics at the Master of Public Administration at Católica Porto Business School the PhD in Economics at the Universidade Católica de Moçambique  Other previous positions: • Assistant Professor at Católica Porto Business School • Researcher at the National Statistics Institute Education: • PhD in Economics at Nova School of Business and Economics • Master in Economics at Faculdade de Economia da Universidade do Porto • Undergraduate degree in Economics at Faculdade de Economia da Universidade do Porto • PhD scholarship from Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia  FRANCISCO SEIXAS DA COSTA Born: 1948 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • Member of the Board of EDP Renováveis SA • Member of the the Nominations and Remunerations Committee of EDP Renováveis SA  Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • Member of the Consultative Council of the School of Economics, University of Coimbra • Member of the Consultative Council of Janus - Journal of International Relations • Member of the General Council of FCSH, Universidade Nova de Lisboa • Chairman of the Consultative Council of the Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation, Delegation in Paris • Independent Non-Executive Director of Jeronimo Martins SGPS SA • Member of the Committee on Corporate Governance and Corporate Responsibility of Jerónimo Martins SGPS SA • Member of the Strategic Council, Mota-Engil SGPS SA • Independent Non-Executive Director, Chairman of the Nomination and Remuneration Committee and Member of the Audit Committee of Mota-Engil Africa SA • University professor, Universidade Autónoma, Lisbon, Portugal Main positions in the last five years: • Ambassador to France and to Monaco (non-resident) • Permanent Representative to UNESCO, Paris • Executive Director of the North-South Centre, Council of Europe • President of the General Council of Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro University (UTAD) Other previous positions: • Career diplomat, Portuguese Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Embassies in Oslo, Luanda and London • Director, Planning and Programming Office, Institute for Economic Co-operation, Secretary of State for Development Co-operation, Lisbon • Portuguese chief negotiator of Lomé IV convention • Deputy Director-General for European Affairs, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Lisbon  206  65   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  • Secretary of State for European Affairs (1995/2001), Portuguese government, Lisbon • Head of Portuguese ministerial delegations to the Council of Europe, the Organisation for Economic and Development Co-operation (OECD), the Western European Union (WEU), the Schengen Agreement and the World Trade Organisation (WTO) (since 1996) • Portuguese chief negotiator of the EU Amsterdam Treaty • President of the Committee of Ministers of the Schengen Agreement • President of the Council of Ministers of the EU Internal Market • Portuguese chief negotiator of the EU Nice Treaty • Permanent Representative to the United Nations, New York, vice-president of ECOSOC, chairman of the Economic and Financial Committee of the General Assembly, vice-president of the General Assembly • Permanent Representative to the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, Vienna, chairman of the OSCE Permanent Council • Ambassador to Brazil, Brasília Education: • Degree in Political and Social Sciences, Lisbon University  SECRETARY OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS EMILIO GARCÍA-CONDE NORIEGA Born: 1955 Current positions in EDPR or EDP group of companies: • General Secretary and General Counsel of EDP Renováveis SA • Member and/or Secretary of several Board of Directors of EDPR’s subsidiaries in Europe • Compliance Officer of EDP Renováveis SA Current positions in companies outside EDPR and EDP group of companies: • (none) Main positions in the last five years: • General Counsel of Hidrocantábrico and member of the management committee • General Secretary and General Counsel of EDP Renováveis SA • Member and/or Secretary of several Board of Directors of EDPR’s subsidiaries in Europe Other previous positions: • Legal Counsel of Soto de Ribera Power Plant (consortium comprising Electra de Viesgo, Iberdrola and Hidrocantábrico) • General Counsel of Soto de Ribera Power Plant • Chief of administration and human resources of the consortium • Legal Counsel of Hidrocantábrico Education: • Law Degree from the University of Oviedo  207 207    6 2016 Consolidated Annual Accounts  Consolidated Income Statement  213  Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income  214  Consolidated Statement of Financial Position  215  Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity  216  Consolidated Statement of Cash-Flows  217  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts  218  Statement of Compliance on SCIRF  298  Auditor's Report on SCIRF  299  Statement of Compliance on Consolidated Financial Information  301  Auditor's Report on the Consolidated Annual Accounts  302     ENERGY AS THE NEWART  16  212  The following Notes form an integral part of these Consolidated Annual Accounts   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Consolidated income statement for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Thousand Euros  Notes  2016  2015  Provisions Amortisation and impairment  1,453,214 197,544 1,650,758  1,349,605 197,442 1,547,047  53,752 -304,740 -93,894 -134,925 -479,807 1,170,951  Other income Supplies and services Personnel costs and employee benefits Other expenses  6 7  8 9 10 11  Revenues Income from institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms  161,560 -292,728 -84,268 -189,316 -404,752 1,142,295  -4,705 -602,287 563,959 54,242 -404,335 -185 213,681  172 -564,629 577,838 61,476 -346,959 -1,517 290,838  12  Financial income Financial expenses Share of net profit in joint ventures and associates Profit before tax  13 13 18  Income tax expense Net profit for the year  14  -37,569 176,112  -45,347 245,491  27 28  56,328 119,784 176,112  166,614 78,877 245,491  26  0.06  0.19  Attributable to: Equity holders of EDP Renováveis Non-controlling interests Net profit for the year Earnings per share basic and diluted - Euros  The following Notes form an integral part of these Consolidated Annual Accounts The following Notes form an integral part of these Consolidated Annual Accounts  The following Notes form an integral part of these Consolidated Annual Accounts  1  213   ENERGY ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THETHE NEWART AS NEWART  Consolidated statement of comprehensive income for the years ended at 31 December 2016 and 2015 2016 Equity Holders of the parent  Thousand Euros  NonControlling Interests  2015 Equity Holders of the parent  NonControlling Interests  56,328  119,784  166,614  78,877  -3 -3  Net profit for the year  -  -  -  -  -  Items that will never be reclassified to profit or loss Actuarial gains/(losses) Tax effect of actuarial gains/(losses)  Items that are or may be reclassified to profit or loss Fair value reserve (available for sale financial assets) Tax effect of fair value reserve (available for sale financial assets) Fair value reserve (cash flow hedge) Tax effect from the fair value reserve (cash flow hedge) Fair value reserve (cash flow hedge) net of taxes of non-current assets held for sale Share of other comprehensive income of joint ventures and associates, net of taxes Reclassification to profit or loss due to ENEOP transaction Exchange differences arising on consolidation Other comprehensive income for the year, net of income tax Total comprehensive income for the year  1,786 -  145 -  399 -  32 -  -23,406 8,108  3,010 -708  14,891 -4,152  1,230 -469  -  -  201  -  1,143  -  -9,404  -  4,707 -7,662 -7,665 48,663  42,730 45,177 45,177 164,961  11,954 21,054 34,943 34,943 201,557  16,415 17,208 17,208 96,085  The following Notes form an an integral part these Consolidated Annual Accounts The following Notes form integral part of of these Consolidated Annual Accounts  214  The following Notes form an integral part of these Consolidated Annual Accounts  2   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Consolidated statement of financial position as at 31 December 2016 and 2015 Thousand Euros  Notes  2016  2015  Property, plant and equipment Intangible assets Goodwill Investments in joint ventures and associates Available for sale financial assets Deferred tax assets Debtors and other assets from commercial activities Other debtors and other assets Collateral deposits associated to financial debt Total Non-Current Assets  15 16 17 18  13,437,427 210,189 1,385,493 340,120 8,186 75,840 83,536 59,845 28,974 15,629,610  12,612,452 172,128 1,362,017 333,800 6,257 47,088 39,573 75,655 65,299 14,714,269  Inventories Debtors and other assets from commercial activities Other debtors and other assets Current tax assets Collateral deposits associated to financial debt Cash and cash equivalents Assets held for sale Total Current Assets Total Assets  20 21 22 23 29 24 25  23,903 280,539 102,491 77,635 17,072 603,219 1,104,859 16,734,469  22,762 259,958 66,033 118,658 8,054 436,732 109,691 1,021,888 15,736,157  26 26 27 27  4,361,541 552,035 -19,652 1,174,710  4,361,541 552,035 -36,938 927,748  56,328  166,614  28  6,124,962 1,448,052  5,971,000 863,109  7,573,014  6,834,109  29 30 19 31 32 33  3,292,591 269,531 365,086 2,339,425 463,908 1,154,437 7,884,978  3,832,413 120,514 316,497 1,956,217 466,296 712,505 7,404,442  Short term financial debt  29  113,478  387,857  Provisions Trade and other payables from commercial activities Other liabilities and other payables Current tax liabilities Liabilities held for sale Total Current Liabilities Total Liabilities Total Equity and Liabilities  30 32 33 34 25  5,531 810,131 258,891 88,446 1,276,477 9,161,455 16,734,469  919 787,357 201,782 64,285 55,406 1,497,606 8,902,048 15,736,157  Assets  Equity Share capital Share premium Reserves Other reserves and Retained earnings Consolidated net profit attributable to equity holders of the parent Total Equity attributable to equity holders of the parent Non-controlling interests  19 21 22 29  Total Equity Liabilities Medium / Long term financial debt Provisions Deferred tax liabilities Institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms Trade and other payables from commercial activities Other liabilities and other payables Total Non-Current Liabilities  The following Notes form an integral part of these Consolidated Annual Accounts  The following Notes form an integral part of these Consolidated Annual Accounts  3  215   ENERGY ASENERGY THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  Consolidated statement of changes in equity for the years ended at 31 December 2016 and 2015  Thousand Euros  Balance as at 31 December 2014  Hedging Reserve  Fair value Reserve  Equity Attributable To equity Holders Of EDP Renováveis  NonControlling Interests  Total Equity  Share Capital  Share Premium  Reserves And retained Earnings  6,330,759  4,361,541  552,035  932,326  -25,793  -41,066  2,603  5,781,646  549,113  431  -  -  -  -  -  399  399  32  11,500  -  -  -  -  10,739  -  10,739  201  -  -  -  -  201  -  201  -  -9,404  -  -  -  -12,498  3,094  -  -9,404  -  11,954  -  -  -  -  11,954  -  11,954  -  Exchange Differences  Comprehensive income: - Fair value reserve (available for sale financial assets) net of taxes - Fair value reserve (cash flow hedge) net of taxes - Fair value reserve (cash flow hedge) net of taxes of noncurrent assets - Share of other comprehensive and associates, net of taxes - Reclassification to profit and loss due to ENEOP transaction Exchange differences arising on consolidation - Net profit for the year  761  37,469  -  -  -  21,054  -  -  21,054  16,415  245,491  -  -  166,614  -  -  -  166,614  78,877  Total comprehensive income for the year  297,642  -  -  166,614  8,556  25,988  399  201,557  96,085  Dividends paid  -34,892  -  -  -34,892  -  -  -  -34,892  -  -43,184  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -43,184  -25,722  -  -  46,484  -  -5,806  1,344  42,022  -67,744  330,183  -  -  -10,558  -7,493  -1,472  -  -19,523  349,706  61,280  -  -  10,096  4,704  -  -  14,800  46,480  -81,957  -  -  -15,708  1,098  -  -  -14,610  -67,347  6,834,109  4,361,541  552,035  1,094,362  -18,928  -22,356  4,346  5,971,000  863,109  1,931  -  -  -  -  -  1,786  1,786  145  -12,996  -  -  -  -  -15,298  -  -15,298  2,302  1,143  -  -  -  -  1,143  -  1,143  -  -3  -  -  -3  -  -  -  -3  -  47,437  -  -  -  4,707  -  -  4,707  42,730  Dividends attributable to noncontrolling interests Acquisitions without changes of control of EDPR Spain subsidiaries Sale without loss of control of EDPR North America subsidiaries Sale without loss of control of EDPR Brazil subsidiaries Other changes resulting from acquisitions/sales and equity increases Balance as at 31 December 2015 Comprehensive income: - Fair value reserve (available for sale financial assets) net of taxes - Fair value reserve (cash flow hedge) net of taxes - Share of other comprehensive and associates, net of taxes - Actuarial gains/(losses) net of taxes Exchange differences arising on consolidation  176,112  -  -  56,328  -  -  -  56,328  119,784  Total comprehensive income for the year  - Net profit for the year  213,624  -  -  56,325  4,707  -14,155  1,786  48,663  164,961  Dividends paid  -43,615  -  -  -43,615  -  -  -  -43,615  -  -42,563  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -42,563  Dividends attributable to noncontrolling interests Acquisitions without changes of control of EDPR Spain subsidiaries Sale without loss of control of EDPR North America subsidiaries Sale without loss of control of EDPR Europe subsidiaries Other changes resulting from acquisitions/sales and equity increases Other Balance as at 31 December 2016  -1,368  -  -  1,327  -  -  -  1,327  -2,695  262,848  -  -  15,140  9,658  -1,338  -  23,460  239,388  414,927  -  -  130,412  1,728  4,424  -  136,564  278,363  -91,031  -  -  -24,747  -  -  -  -24,747  -66,284  26,086  -  -  1,834  10,476  -  -  12,310  7,573,014  4,361,541  552,035  1,231,038  7,641  -33,425  6,132  6,124,962  The following Notes form form an integral part these Consolidated Annual Accounts The following Notes an integral part of of these Consolidated Annual Accounts  216  The following Notes form an integral part of these Consolidated Annual Accounts  13,773 1,448,052  4   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Consolidated statement of cash flows for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Thousand Euros  2016  Operating activities Cash receipts from customers Payments to suppliers Payments to personnel Other receipts / (payments) relating to operating activities Net cash from operations Income tax received / (paid) Net cash flows from operating activities Investing activities Cash receipts relating to: Changes in cash resulting from perimeter variations (*) Property, plant and equipment and intangible assets Interest and similar income Dividends Loans to related parties Other receipts from investing activities Cash payments relating to: Acquisition of assets / subsidiaries Property, plant and equipment and intangible assets Loans to related parties Other payments in investing activities Net cash flows from investing activities Financing activities Sale of assets / subsidiaries without loss of control (**) Receipts/ (payments) relating to loans Interest and similar costs Governmental grants received Dividends paid Receipts / (payments) from wind activity institutional partnerships - USA Other cash flows from financing activities Net cash flows from financing activities  2015  1,432,454 -416,125 -92,245 10,302 934,386  1,308,708 -340,271 -79,981 -131,311 757,145  -65,697 868,689  -55,704 701,441  2,166 2,412 9,847 6,313 41,460 30,144 92,342  98,507 9,106 11,021 13,481 183,079 4,765 319,959  -52,751 -1,019,167 -45,160 -5,199 -1,122,277 -1,029,935  -159,318 -876,386 -30,171 -537 -1,066,412 -746,453  697,881 -449,089 -239,897 -84,727 451,788 -67,239 308,717  394,851 -45,353 -215,894 -78,076 68,474 -13,151 110,851  Changes in cash and cash equivalents 147,471 65,839 Effect of exchange rate fluctuations on cash held 19,016 2,270 Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the period 436,732 368,623 Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the period (***) 603,219 436,732 (*) Refers to the acquisition of the company Parco Eólico Banzi S.r.l. (see note 42). (**) Includes (i) 318,549 thousand Euros related to the sale by EDPR Europe of 49% of its interests in several European companies; (ii) 278,662 thousand Euros related to the sale by EDPR NA of 49% of its interests in several American companies and (iii) 100,670 thousand Euros related to the sale by EDPR Polska of 49% of its interests in several Polish companies (see note 5) (***) See note 24 of the consolidated financial statements for a detailed breakdown of Cash and cash equivalents.  The following Notes form an an integral part ofthese Consolidated Annual Accounts The following Notes form integral part of these Consolidated Annual Accounts  The following Notes form an integral part of these Consolidated Annual Accounts  5  217   ENERGY ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  Notes to the consolidated annual accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  01. The business operations of the EDP Renováveis Group 02. Accounting policies 03. Critical accounting estimates and judgments in applying accounting policies 04. Financial risk management policies 05. Consolidation perimeter 06. Revenues 07. Income from institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms 08. Other income 09. Supplies and services 10. Personnel costs and employee benefits 11. Other expenses 12. Amortisation and impairment 13. Financial income and financial expenses 14. Income tax expense 15. Property, plant and equipment 16. Intangible assets 17. Goodwill 18. Investments in Joint Ventures and Associates 19. Deferred tax assets and liabilities 20. Inventories 21. Debtors and other assets from commercial activities 22. Other debtors and other assets 23. Current tax assets 24. Cash and cash equivalents 25. Assets and liabilities held for sale 26. Share capital and share premium 27. Other comprehensive income, reserves and retained earnings 28. Non-controlling interests 29. Financial debt 30. Provisions 31. Institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms 32. Trade and other payables from commercial activities 33. Other liabilities and other payables 34. Current tax liabilities 35. Derivative financial instruments 36. Commitments 37. Related parties 38. Fair value of financial assets and liabilities 39. Relevant and subsequent events 40. Recent accounting standards and interpretations used 41. Environment issues 42. Business combinations 43. Operating segments report 44. Audit and non audit fees Annex 1 Annex 2  218  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  219 225 235 237 240 247 247 248 248 248 249 249 249 250 252 254 255 257 260 262 262 262 263 263 263 264 265 266 267 269 269 270 270 271 272 274 275 278 280 281 283 283 284 284 285 298  6   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  01. The business operations of the EDP Renováveis Group EDP Renováveis, Sociedad Anónima (hereinafter referred to as “EDP Renováveis” or “EDPR”) was incorporated on 4 December 2007. Its main corporate objective is to engage in activities related to the electricity sector, namely the planning, construction, operation and maintenance of electricity generating power stations, using renewable energy sources, mainly wind. The registered offices of the company are located in Oviedo, Spain. On 18 March 2008 EDP Renováveis was converted into a company incorporated by shares (Sociedad Anónima). As at 31 December 2014 the share capital was held 62.02% by EDP S.A. - Sucursal en España ("EDP Branch"), 15.51% by Hidroeléctrica del Cantábrico, S.A. (“HC”) and 22.47% of the share capital was free-floated in the NYSE Euronext Lisbon. On December 18th 2015, EDP S.A. - Sucursal en España acquired to Hidroeléctrica del Cantábrico, S.A., its block of shares, so that, as at December 2015 and 2016 EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A holds directly, through its Spanish branch, a qualified shareholding of 77.5% of the share capital and voting rights of EDPR. As a result of this acquisition, HC no longer holds any shareholding in EDPR (see note 27). As at 31 December 2016, EDP Renováveis S.A. holds direcly a 100% stake in the share capital of the following companies: EDP Renewables Europe, S.L. (EDPR EU), EDP Renewables North America, LLC (EDPR NA), EDP Renewables Canada, Ltd. (EDPR Canada), South África Wind & Solar Power, S.L.U., EDP Renováveis Servicios Financieros, S.L. and EDP Renováveis Brasil, S.A. (EDPR BR) and indirectly a 100% stake in S.C.Ialomita Power S.r.l., EDPR RO PV, S.r.l. (both being part of EDPR Romania), EDPR Servicios de Mexico, S. de R.L. de C.V and Greenwind S.A. The Company belongs to the EDP Group, of which the parent company is EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A., with registered offices at Avenida 24 de Julho, 12, Lisbon. In December 2011, China Three Gorges Corporation (CTG) sign an agreement to acquire 780,633,782 ordinary shares in EDP from Parpública - Participações Públicas SGPS, S.A., representing 21.35% of the share capital and voting rights of EDP Energias de Portugal S.A., a majority shareholder of the Company. This operation was concluded in May 2012. The terms of the agreements through which CTG became a shareholder of the EDP Group stipulate that CTG would make minority investments totalling 2,000 million of Euros in operating and ready-to-build renewable energy generation projects (including co-funding capex). Within the agreement mentioned above, the following transactions have taken place: -  In June 2013, EDPR completed the sale of 49% equity shareholding in EDPR Portugal to CTG through CITIC CWEI Renewables S.C.A.  -  In May 2015, EDPR closed the sale of 49% of the following EDPR Brasil subsidiaries to CTG through CWEI Brasil participaçoes LTDA: Elebrás Projetos S.A, Central Nacional de Energia Eólica S.A, Central Eólica Baixa do Feijão I S.A, Central Eólica Baixa do Feijão II S.A, Central Eólica Baixa do Feijão III S.A, Central Eólica Baixa do Feijão IV S.A, Central Eólica Jau S.A. and Central Eólica Aventura S.A.  -  In October 2016, EDPR completed the sale of 49% equity shareholding in EDP Renewables Polska SP.Zo.o. to CTG through ACE Poland S.Á.R.L. with a subsequent loss in its subsidiaries and the sale of 49% equity shareholding in EDP Renewables Italia S.r.l. to CTG through ACE Italy S.Á.R.L. with a subsequent loss in its subsidiaries (see note 5).  In this context, EDPR has entered into new agreements with CTG during the beginning of 2017 and therefore with no impacts in 2016 (see note 39). EDPR EU operates through its subsidiaries located in Portugal, Spain, France, Belgium, Poland, Romania, Italy and United Kingdom. EDPR EU's main subsidiaries are: EDP Renováveis Portugal, S.A. (wind farms in Portugal), EDP Renovables España, S.L. (wind farms in Spain), EDP Renewables France (wind farms in France), EDP Renewables Belgium (wind farms in Belgium), EDP Renewables Polska, SP.ZO.O (wind farms in Poland), S.C. Ialomita Power , S.r.l. (wind farms in Romania), EDP Renewables Italy, SRL (wind farms in Italy), EDPR UK Limited (offshore development projects) and EDPR RO PV, S.L.R. (photovoltaic solar farms in Romania). EDPR NA's main activities consist in the development, management and operation of wind farms in the United States of America and providing management services for EDPR Canada. EDPR Canada's main activities consist in the development, management and operation of wind farms in Canada. The purpose of EDP Renováveis Brasil is to aggregate all the investments in the renewable energy market of Brazil.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  219 7  219   ENERGY ENERGY AS NEWART ENERGY AS THETHE NEWART AS THE NEWART  EDP Renováveis Group, through its subsidiaries has an installed capacity, as follows: Installed capacity MW United States of America Spain Portugal Romania Poland France Brazil Belgium Italy Canada Mexico  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  4,631 2,194 1,251 521 418 388 204 71 144 30 (*) 200 10,052  4,203 2,194 1,247 521 468 364 84 71 100 30 9,282  (*) It refers to the Mexican wind farm Eólica de Coahuila S.A. de C.V. which is consolidated through the equity method as of December 31, 2016 and will be fully consolidated once it starts operations, expected for the first quarter of 2017.  Additionally, the EDP Renováveis Group through its equity-consolidated companies has an installed capacity, attributed to EDPR, as follows: Installed capacity MW United States of America Spain  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  179 177 356  179 177 356  Regulatory framework for the activities in the United States of America The United States federal government and various state governments have implemented policies designed to promote the growth of renewable energy, including wind power. The primary federal renewable energy incentive program is the Production Tax Credit (PTC), which was established by the U.S. Congress as part of 1992 Energy Policy Act. Additionally, many states have passed legislation, principally in the form of renewable portfolio standards (“RPS”), which require utilities to purchase a certain percentage of their energy supply from renewable sources, similar to the Renewable Energy Directive in the EU. American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 includes a number of energy related tax and policy provisions to benefit the development of wind energy generation, namely (i) a three year extension of the PTC until 2012 and (ii) an option to elect a 30% Investment Tax Credit ("ITC") that could replace the PTC through the duration of the extension. This ITC allows the companies to receive 30% of the cash invested in projects placed in service or with the beginning of construction in 2009 and 2010. In December 2010, the Tax Relief, Unemployment, Insurance and Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010 was approved and includes an one year extension of the ITC, which allow the companies to receive 30% of the cash invested in projects with beginning of construction until December 2011 as long as placed in service until December 2012. On 1 January 2013, the US Congress approved "The American Taxpayer Relief Act" that includes an extension of the Production Tax Credit (PTC) for wind energy, including the possibility of a 30% Investment Tax Credit (ITC) instead of the PTC. Congress set 31 December 2013 as the new expiration date of these benefits and changed the qualification criteria (projects will only qualify as long as they are under construction by year-end 2013). The legislation also includes a depreciation bonus on new equipment placed in service which allows the depreciation of a higher percentage of the cost of the project (less 50% of the Investment Tax Credit) in the year that it is placed in service. This bonus depreciation was 100% in 2011 and 50% for 2012. On 16 December 2014, the U.S. Congress approved the "Tax Increase Prevention Act of 2014" that included an extension of the PTC for wind, including the possibility of a 30% Investment Tax Credit instead of the PTC. Congress set a new expiration date of 31 December 2014 and kept the qualification criteria (projects can qualify as long as they are under construction by year-end 2014). On 15 December 2015, the US Congress approved the “Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016” that included an extension of the PTC for wind, as well as the possibility of a 30% Investment Tax Credit instead of the PTC. Developers now have until the end of 2016 to start construction of new wind farms to qualify for 10 years of production tax credits at the full level. Congress introduced a phase out for projects that start construction after 2016 and before 2020. These projects will still qualify for production tax credits, but at reduced levels. The levels are 80% for projects starting construction in 2017, 60% in 2018, and 40% in 2019. Developers of projects that start construction before 2020 may elect to claim 30% investment tax credits instead of production tax credits, subject to a similar phase out. The phase out reduces the value of the 30% investment tax credit to 24% in 2017, 18% in 2018, and 12% in 2019. Neither production tax credits nor investment tax credits are allowed for wind projects that start construction in 2020 or later. The aforementioned "Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016" also extended the Investment Tax Credit (ITC) for solar projects. Solar projects that are under construction by the end of 2019 will now qualify for the 30% ITC. The credit is reduced to 26% for projects starting construction in 2020 and to 22% for projects starting construction in 2021. The credit drops to a permanent 10% level for projects that begin construction in 2022 or later or that begin construction before 2022, but are placed in service in 2024 or later. Projects must be placed in service by the end of 2023 to qualify for a credit above 10%.  220  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  8   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUALEDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  On 9 February 2016, the U.S. Supreme Court stayed implementation of the Clean Power Plan (CPP) announced by the United States' Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on 3 August 2015, a rule to cut carbon pollution from existing power plants, which is pending judicial review. As of year-end 2016, the judicial review process is ongoing with the DC Circuit Court. Additionally, on 5 May 2016, the US Internal Revenue Service issued guidance that wind farms have 4 years from their start of construction to be placed in service and qualify for the PTC. As a result, projects that start construction prior to year-end 2019 and are placed in service prior to year-end 2023 will be eligible for the PTC. The IRS ruling also includes a provision that allows developers to secure the PTC if 5% of a project's capital components by dollar value are safe harbored in a given year and construction is complete within 4 years. Thus, if a developer safe harbors 5% of project Capex in 2016 for a given project, the project will qualify for 100% PTC if construction is completed by year-end 2020.  Regulatory framework for the activities in Spain On 12 July 2013 the Spanish Council of Ministers approved a comprehensive reform of the energy sector. This energy reform was afterwards implemented by means of a new “Energy Sector Act”, a Decree-Law, eight Royal Decrees and three Ministerial Orders. As a part or this Energy Reform, Royal Decree-Law 9/2013 was passed in July 2013. The purpose of this Royal Decree-Law was to adopt a series of measures to ensure the sustainability of the electricity system, affecting mainly the electricity transport, distribution and renewable sectors. Prior to Royal Decree-Law 9/2013, renewable generators benefited from a feed-in tariff regime in which renewable electricity could be sold at a regulated feed-in tariff or at the Spanish wholesale market price plus a variable premium. According to the 2013 regulatory framework, renewable energy facilities are entitled to sell the electricity they generate into the Spanish wholesale market and, during their respective regulatory lives, receive additional payments per installed MW from the Spanish electricity system through the “Comisión Nacional de los Mercados y la Competencia (CNMC)” body. This regulatory system is intended to allow each standard wind farm to achieve a pre-tax rate of return (fixed at 7,398% until 2019 YE) over its regulatory life. This “reasonable return” was determined by reference to the 10-year Spanish government bond plus a spread of 300 basis points. Regarding the wind sector, Decree Law 413/2014 confirmed that wind farms in operation in 2003 (or before) would not receive any further incentive, while the incentive for the rest of the wind farms would be calculated in order to reach the 7,398% return before taxes. More than 1.300 possible types of renewables installation (“standard facilities”) are included in the Decree Law, 23 of them corresponding to wind farms of more than 5 MW classified by the year of first operation (from 1994 to 2016). In October 2015 the Government approved Royal Decree 947/2015 and a Ministerial Order aimed at allowing the installation of new renewable capacity through competitive tenders. On January 14th 2016 the first renewable auction was held. The auction was designed to provide a similar remuneration scheme that the one applying to operating facilities (ruled by RD 413/2014). Following this framework, tender participants were requested to bid discounts on the “initial investment” (CAPEX) parameter which would then, by being plugged in the formula set by RD 413/2014, determine the “Rinv” (investment premium) that would eventually be awarded. Developers were bidding to build 500 MW of wind energy and 200 MW of biomass plants. The auction was very competitive, around 5 times oversubscribed for onshore wind. EDPR was awarded 93 MW of wind energy. In 2016 the Spanish Government announced it would carry out a new renewables capacity auction in the first months of 2017, after submitting to the CNMC a draft legislation package to articulate the process. Although the auction rules will be in line with the previous ones, there will be some differences. For example, the auction will be technologically neutral, meaning that projects based on different renewable energy technologies, such as wind, solar and biomass, will be able to compete for contracts. The auction will also include control mechanisms and guarantee requirements to ensure the execution and completion of the winning projects. Projects will need to be completed by December 2019, in order to contribute to the fulfillment of the Spanish 2020 target (20% of its energy coming from renewable sources).  Regulatory framework for the activities in Portugal The Portuguese legal provisions applicable to the generation of power from renewable sources are currently established by Decree-Law 189/88 dated 27 May, (subsequently amended by Decree-Law 168/99 dated 18 May, Decree-Law 312/2001 dated 10 December and Decree-Law 339-C/2001 dated 29 December). Also relevant is Decree-Law 33-A/2005, dated 16 February 2005 (“DL 33-A/2005”), which establishes the feed-in tariff remuneration applicable to energy produced by renewable sources. The Portuguese Government published on 28 February 2013, the Decree Law 35/2013 that maintains the legal stability of the current feed-in tariff contracts (following Decree-Law 33-A/2005) and protects the value of the investments made by wind energy producers. However, this Decree Law granted the possibility to adhere to voluntary changes of the existing feed-in tariff. Indeed, wind generators could extend the support scheme (generally 5 or 7 years) in exchange of upfront payments or discounts on existing tariffs. EDPR chose a 7 year extension of the tariff defined as the average market price of previous twelve months, with a floor of 74€/MWh and a cap of 98€/MWh (values updated with inflation from 2021 onwards) in exchange for yearly payments from 2013 to 2020.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  221 9  221   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE THE NEWART AS NEWART ENERGY AS THE NEWART  The Environment and Energy Ministry published on 24 July 2014, the Decree Law 94/2014 that allows the increase of installed capacity of wind farms up to 20%. The additional production generated from the capacity increase would have a fixed remuneration of 60 Euros/MWh, whilst the remaining production would be remunerated at the previous tariff.  Regulatory framework for the activities in France The power sector is governed primarily by Act 2000-108 (amended by Acts 2004-803 and 2006-1537) (“Act 2000’), passed in February 2000, which regulates the modernization and development of public energy services. Act 2000 allows wind operators to enter into long-term agreements for the sale of their energy with Electricité de France (EDF), the national utility. The tariffs were initially set in 2001, then changed in 2006 for new facilities (by Order of July 10). The 2006 tariffs are the following: i) during the first ten years of the PPA, EDF pays a fixed annual tariff, which is €82 per MWh for applications made during 2006 (tariff is amended annually based, in part, on an inflation-related index); ii) During years 11 to 15 of the PPA, the tariff is based on the annual average percentage of energy produced during the wind facility's first ten years (these tariffs are also amended annually, based, in part, on an inflation-related index); iii) Beginning in the year 16, there is no specific support and wind energy generators will sell their electricity at the market, thus receiving market price. The 2006 feedin tariff was repealed in 2008 due to formal defects in its approval, but was subsequently republished in December 2008 with the same content. On March 2012, the legality of the feed-in tariff ministerial order for wind farm projects was questioned before the French Council of State (Conseil dÉtat) on the basis that the required notification to the European Commission on State Aid has not been done. After years of litigation, the French Council of State decided to cancel the French Wind Tariff on May 2014. Shortly after, the French Government approved and released a new tariff decree ("Arrêté du 17 juin 2014") that had previously received clearance from the European Union. This new decree contains the same parameters than the former one and came into force with retroactive effects. Therefore, it didn´t endanger or modify any power purchase agreement signed under the 2008 Order. In July 2015, the “Energy Transition bill”, whose aim is to build a long-term and comprehensive energy strategy, was passed. In 66 articles, the text targets to cut France's greenhouse gas emissions by 40% between 1990 and 2030 (and divide them by four by 2050), to halve the country's energy usage by 2050, to reduce the share of fossil fuels in energy production, to cap the total output from nuclear power at 63.2 GW and bring the share of renewables up to 32% of the energy mix. On April 15th 2016, the French council of State published a decision ordering the government to start recovering the interests that the feed-in tariff received from 2008 to 2014 would have generated. This decision was based on the grounds that the French Government failed to notify the European Commission the Ministerial Order approving the Feed-in tariff. A Contract-for-difference (CfD) scheme replacing the feed-in tariff scheme was released in December 2016 for wind farms having requested a PPA in 2016. According to the decree, the strike price would be equal to the value of the current feed-in tariff (similar tenure, indexation and adjustment after year 10), plus a management fee to compensate balancing costs (2,8 €/MWh). The market reference price will be the production weighted average pool price, using a representative production profile of the wind industry in France. The settlement would be done on a monthly basis. The French Government also disclosed a draft decree for the 2017 CfDs for wind farms below 6 wind turbines. According to the draft, the CfD tenure will be extended to 20 years (instead of 15 years), being the strike price 72€/MWh (plus the management fee). The draft also includes a limitation of the amount of energy to be remunerated under the CfD strike price. Larger wind farms will be awarded CfDs through competitive tenders. Additionally, on April 24th, 2016 the French Government enacted the so-called “Programmation pluriannuelle des Investissements” (PPI) which objective is to set different renewables’ capacity targets by technology, in order to achieve the objectives of the “Loi de Transition Énergétique”. The PPI provides short-term (2018) and medium-term (2023) renewables’ capacity targets and also includes a provisional timetable of the next renewable tenders to be launched between 2017 and 2019.  Regulatory framework for the activities in Poland The legislation applicable to renewable energy in Poland is primarily contained in an Energy Act passed in April 1997, which was subsequently amended by Act 24 July 2002 and the Energy Act of 2 April 2004, which came into effect in January 2005 (together, the ‘‘Energy Act’’). The Energy Act introduced a support scheme for renewable energy facilities. The law designed a system of obligatory purchase Green Certificates (GC) by companies selling electricity to end-consumers, with mandatory quotas. These power companies are obliged to: a) obtain GC and submit them to the Energy Regulator, or b) pay a substitution fee calculated in accordance with the Energy Act. If suppliers fail to meet their obligation (either the submission of GC or the payment of substitution fee), they must pay a fine, equal to 130% of the substitution fee in that year. Under the current legislation, the following quota apply (as amended by the ministerial decree of 18 October 2012): 2016: 15.0%, 2017:16.0%, 2018:17.0%, 2019:18.0% , 2020:19.0% and 2021:20.0%. However, the GC scheme was amended in 2015. In February 2015 a new Renewables Law was approved, introducing a different support system for new facilities. According to the law, the current Green Certificate (GC) system would be replaced by a tender scheme granting “Contracts-for-difference”. The law ensures that the current GC scheme is maintained (with some adjustments) for operating plants. These plants will have, however, the possibility to remain under the existing GC scheme or shift to the new scheme through specific tenders for operating assets.  222  222  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  10   ANNUAL REPORT  ANNUALEDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  In mid-December 2015, as a result of the changes in Parliament (Poland’s general election on 25 October was won by the rightwing Law and Justice Party “PiS”), the new government postponed the implementation of tenders. On February 19th, 2016 the PiS MPs party proposed a draft law on wind investments covering localization, realizations and operation of wind farms, the so-called “Wind Turbine Investment Act”. After a long approval process in which the renewable sector succeeded in introducing some amendments to the original draft, the law was finally approved. The main measures of this new law include: minimum distance restrictions for new wind farms and increased real estate tax burden. On the other hand, and following the delay of the implementation of RES Act Chapter 4, the government proposed to polish parliament a more comprehensive amendment of the RES Act in early May 2016. These amendments were finally approved and published in late June. While keeping the core of the new auction system, these new amendments brought some modifications (namely introducing technology baskets for future tenders and improving the treatment of biomass, biogas and cofiring technologies). In October 2016 the Polish Government published the Ordinance detailing the amount and value of energy to be auctioned in 2016. Wind energy was not included among the technologies allowed to participate (except for facilities below 1 MW). The auction was held the 30th of December, 2016. On November 23rd, 2016 the Polish government disclosed a draft ordinance detailing the amount and value of energy planned to be auctioned in 2017. The draft highlights that baseload renewables (dedicated biomass and biogas) remain key to the government as they will be allocated around 50% of the total 2017’s auction budget. The new draft proposes the budget to be allocated to the pot in which new onshore wind could compete. This amount could amount up to 150 MW. It´s also likely that wind and PV will compete for the same budget.  Regulatory framework for the activities in Belgium The regulatory framework for electricity in Belgium is conditioned by the division of powers between the federal and the three regional entities: Wallonia, Flanders and Brussels-Capital. The federal regulatory field of competence includes electricity transmission (of transmission levels above 70 kV), generation, tariffs, planning and nuclear energy. The relevant federal legislation is the Electricity Act of 29 April 1999 (as modified) (the ‘‘Electricity Act’’). The regional regulatory entities are responsible for distribution, renewable energy and cogeneration (with the exception of offshore power plants) and energy efficiency. The relevant regional legislation, respectively, is: (a) for Flanders, the Electricity Decree of 17 July 2000; (b) for Wallonia, the Regional Electricity Market Decree of 12 April 2001; and (c) for Brussels-Capital, the Order of 19 July 2001 on the Organization of the Electricity Market. The Belgian regulatory system promotes the generation of electricity from renewable sources (and cogeneration) by a system of Green Certificates (GC). Each region has its GC system, although all of them are similar (with differences in quotas, fines and thresholds for granting GCs). In Wallonia, Green Certificates have a minimum price of 65€ and the penalty for non-compliance is set at 100€ per missing GC. From 1 January 2015, the number of GC allocated to each technology is calculated according to a new methodology taking following factors into consideration (i) the net amount of electricity produced (ii) the level of CO2 abatement (iii) the economic performance coefficient that varies depending on the technology. The renewable’s quota in Wallonia was fixed at 30,4% in 2016 and will increase to 37,9% in 2020.  Regulatory frameworks for the activities in Romania The promotion of electricity generated from renewable energy sources in Romania was first included in the Electricity Law 318/2003. In 2005 a Green Certificate (GC) mechanism was introduced with mandatory quotas for suppliers, in order to comply with their EU renewable requirements. Since then, the regulatory authority establishes a fixed quota of electricity produced by renewable energy facilities which suppliers are obliged to fulfil. Law 220/2008 of November, introduced some changes in the GC system. In particular, it allowed wind generators to receive 2GC/MWh until 2015. From 2016 onwards generators would receive only 1 GC for each MWh during 15 years. The law also guaranteed that the trading value of GC would have a floor of 27€ and a cap of 55€, both indexed to Romanian inflation. Law 220/2008 on renewable energy was amended by the Emergency Order 88/2011. A key aspect of this amendment was the need to perform an “overcompensation analysis” on a yearly basis. ANRE (Energy Regulator) was charged to monitor the benefits obtained by renewables’ producers and annually prepare a report on this regard. If overcompensation is observed, ANRE has to propose a reduction of the applicability period of the support scheme or the number of GCs granted to the technology. This reduction would be then applied only to new facilities. Law 123/2012 of 19 July 2012 on Electricity and Natural Gas eliminated the provision of bilateral contracts not publicly negotiated as a mean to sale electricity. Thus, trading of electricity must be carried out on a centralized market. The Romanian Parliament passed on 17 December 2013, the law for the approval of the Government Emergency Ordinance 57/2013 (the Ordinance), which brought some amendments, being the main ones: - The postponement of GC for operating plants. The postponement only applies to renewable energy operators accredited by ANRE before 2013. Wind power producers would be entitled to receive 2 GCs/MWh until 2017 (inclusive) of which 1 GC is postponed from trading from 1 July 2013 to 31 March 2017. Solar producers have 2 GCs (out of 6 GCs) postponed from trading  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  223 11  223   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART ENERGY AS THE NEWART  from 1 July 2013 to 31 March 2017. The GCs postponed would be gradually recovered until 31 December 2020 (starting on 1 April 2017 for solar PV and 1 January 2018 for wind); - Wind facilities accredited after this date would receive 1.5 GC/MWh until 2017 and 0.75 GC/MWh from 2018 onwards during 15 years. All these GCs were immediately tradable; - Solar facilities would receive 3 GCs from 1 January 2014 onwards. On 24 March 2014, the President of Romania ratified EGO 57/2013 with the following amendments: (i) Reduction of the GC validity from 16 months to 12 months; and (ii) the obligation for ANRE (Energy Regulator) to communicate in each year the GC quota for the next year. The Romanian government approved the draft ordinance setting a quota of 8,3% for 2017. The value approved is in line with the value proposed by ANRE in June 30. In October 2016, the Ministry of Energy published for consultation a draft amendment to the current RES law, aimed at potentially improving GC market oversupply and system sustainability. It includes, among other amendments, an extension of the GC scheme until 2031, a removal of the indexation of the GC parameters and the extension of the GC recovery for wind energy from 2018 to 2025. Regarding PV projects, the draft amendments proposes an extension of the GC postponement until the end of 2024, fixing the recovery from 2025 to 2030  Regulatory frameworks for the activities in Italy On 6 July 2012, the Government approved a new renewable regulation by means of the Decree on Renewables (DM FER) introducing a feed-in-tariff support scheme (therefore, shifting away from the former GC system). The key aspects of this regulation provided by the DM FER were the following: (i) wind farms over 5 MW would be remunerated under a feed-in tariff scheme defined by tenders; (ii) capacity to be tendered to be set by different technologies’ capacity paths; (iii) the reference tariff for 2013 was 127 €/MWh for onshore wind and tender participants would bid offering discounts on this reference tariff (in %); (iv) The reference tariff would decrease 2% per year and (v) tariffs would be granted for 20 years. Since the implementation of the tender system, 3 reverse-auction have been held. The latest was hold in 2016 and awarded 869,8 MW of offtake contracts. EDP Renováveis SA was awarded 20-year PPAs for six wind farms totaling 127 MW of wind power.  Regulatory frameworks for the activities in Brazil The Electrical Sector in Brazil is regulated by Federal Law nr 8,987 of 13 February 1995, which generally rules the concession and permission regime of public services; Law nr 9,074 of 7 July 1995, which rules the grant and extension of public services concession or permission contracts; Federal Law nr 10,438 of 26 April 2002, which governs the increase in Emergency Electric Power Supply and creates the 3,300 MW Program of Incentives for Alternative Electricity Sources (PROINFA); Federal Law nr 10,762 of 11 November 2003 and Law nr 10,848 of 15 March 2004, concerning commercial rules for the trade of Electric Power; and, subsequent amendments to the legislation. The Decree nr 5,025 of 30 March 2004, regulates the Federal Law nr 10,438 and states the "Alternative Energy Sources" economical and legal framework. PROINFA participants have granted a PPA with ELETROBRÁS, and are subject to the regulator (ANEEL) authority. However, the first stage of PROINFA has ended and the second stage is highly uncertain. After PROINFA program, renewable producers obtain their remuneration by participating in auctions where price is the only criteria. Winners of the auctions obtain a PPA contract at the price bid. Public Electricity Auctions are technically lead by the state “Energy Planning and Research Company” (EPE), who registers, analyses and allows potential participants. On 13 November 2015, the latest Reserve Auction (A-3) took place. As a result, Brazilian government contracted 1.664 MW of wind (548 MW) and solar PV (1.1 GW) capacity for a 20-year long-term contract through this auction. The auction exclusively sought wind and PV projects, with power delivery start date being 1 November 2018. Wind ceiling price was BRL 213/MWh. EDPR, through its subsidiary EDP Renováveis Brasil, S.A., secured in this auction a 20-year Power Purchase Agreement to sell electricity in the regulated market. The energy will be produced by a 140 MW wind farm to be installed in the Brazilian State of Bahia with operations expected for 2018. The initial price of the long term contract was set at R$199.37/MWh, indexed to the Brazilian inflation rate.  224  224  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  12   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  02. Accounting policies a) Basis of preparation The accompanying consolidated annual accounts have been prepared on the basis of the accounting records of EDP Renováveis, S.A. and consolidated entities. The consolidated annual accounts for 2016 and 2015 have been prepared to present fairly the consolidated equity and consolidated financial position of EDP Renováveis, S.A. and subsidiaries at 31 December 2016 and 2015, the consolidated results of operations, consolidated cash flows and changes in consolidated equity for the years then ended. In accordance with Regulation (EC) no. 1606/2002 of 19 July 2002, from the European Council and Parliament, the Group's consolidated annual accounts are prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), as endorsed by the European Union (EU). IFRS comprise accounting standards issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and its predecessor body as well as interpretations issued by the International Financial Reporting Interpretations Committee (IFRIC) and its predecessor bodies. The Board of Directors approved these consolidated annual accounts on 27 February 2017. The annual accounts are presented in thousand Euros, rounded to the nearest thousand. The annual accounts have been prepared under the historical cost convention, modified by the application of fair value basis for derivative financial instruments, financial assets and liabilities held for trading and available-for-sale, except those for which a reliable measure of fair value is not available. The preparation of financial statements in accordance with the IFRS-EU requires the Board of Directors to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the application of the accounting policies and of the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, income and expenses. The estimates and related assumptions are based on historical experience and other factors considered reasonable in accordance with the circumstances. They form the basis for making judgments regarding the values of the assets and liabilities whose valuation is not apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. The areas involving the highest degree of judgment or complexity, or for which the assumptions and estimates are considered significant, are disclosed in note 3 - Critical accounting estimates and judgments in applying accounting policies. Accounting policies have been applied consistently by all Group companies and in all periods presented in the consolidated financial statements. The consolidated balance sheet, consolidated income statement, consolidated statement of changes in equity, consolidated statement of cash flows and the notes thereto for 2016 include comparative figures for 2015, which formed part of the consolidated annual accounts approved by shareholders at the annual general meeting held on April 14, 2016.  b) Basis of consolidation Controlled entities Investments in subsidiaries where the Group has control are fully consolidated from the date the Group assumes control over their financial and operating activities until the moment that control ceases to exist. An investor controls an investee when it is exposed, or has rights, to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee, independently of the percentage of voting rights held. Joint arrangements The Group classifies an arrangement as a joint arrangement when the jointly control is contractually established. An investor controls an investee when it is exposed, or has rights, to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee, independently of the percentage of voting rights held. Joint control exists only when decisions about the relevant activities require the unanimous consent of the parties that collectively control the arrangement. After determining the existence of joint control, the Group classifies joint arrangements into two types - joint operations and joint ventures. A joint operation is a joint arrangement whereby the parties that have joint control of the arrangement (i.e. joint operators) have rights to the assets, and obligations for the liabilities, relating to the arrangement, so the assets and liabilities (and related revenues and expenses) in relation to its interest in the arrangement are recognised and measured in accordance with relevant IFRSs applicable. A joint venture is a joint arrangement whereby the parties that have joint control of the arrangement (i.e. joint ventures) have rights to the net assets of the arrangement, so this investment shall be included in the consolidated financial statements under the equity method. The consolidated financial statements include the Group's attributable share of total reserves and profits or losses of joint ventures, included in the consolidated financial statements under the equity method. When the Group’s share of losses exceeds its interest in a jointly controlled entity, the Group's carrying amount is reduced to zero and recognition of further losses is discontinued, except to the extent that the Group has a legal or constructive obligation to cover such losses on behalf of that entity.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  225 13  225   ENERGY ENERGY AS NEWART ENERGY AS THE THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  Entities over which the Group has significant influence Investments in associates are included in the consolidated financial statements under the equity method from the date the Group acquires significant influence to the date it ceases. Associates are entities over which the Group has significant influence, but not control, over its financial and operating policies. The existence of significant influence by the Group is usually evidenced by one or more of the following: - Representation on the Executive Board of Directors or equivalent governing body of the investee; - Participation in policy-making processes, including participation in decisions about dividends and other distributions; - Existence of material transactions between the Group and the investee; - Interchange of managerial personnel; - Provision of essential technical information. The consolidated financial statements include the Group's attributable share of total reserves and profits or losses of associates, included in the consolidated financial statements under the equity method. When the Group’s share of losses exceeds its interest in an associate, the Group's carrying amount is reduced to zero and recognition of further losses is discontinued, except to the extent that the Group has a legal or constructive obligation to cover such losses on behalf of the associate. Business combination From 1 January 2010 the Group has applied IFRS 3 Business Combinations (2008) in accounting for business combinations. Business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method as at the acquisition date, which is the date on which control is transferred to the Group. Control is the power to govern the financial and operating policies of an entity so as to obtain benefits from its activities. In assessing control, the Group takes into consideration potential voting rights that currently are exercisable. Acquisitions on or after 1 January 2010 For acquisitions on or after 1 January 2010, the Group measures goodwill at the acquisition date as: •  The fair value of the consideration transferred; plus  •  The recognised amount of any non-controlling interests in the acquiree; plus  •  If the business combination is achieved in stages, the fair value of the existing equity interest in the acquiree; less  •  The net recognised amount (generally fair value) of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed.  When the excess is negative, a bargain purchase gain is recognised immediately in profit or loss. The consideration transferred does not include amounts related to the settlement of pre-existing relationships. Such amounts are generally recognised in profit or loss. Costs related to the acquisition, other than those associated with the issue of debt or equity securities, that the Group incurs in connection with a business combination are expensed as incurred. Any contingent consideration payable is recognised at fair value at the acquisition date. If the contingent consideration is classified as equity, it is not remeasured and settlement is accounted for within equity. Otherwise, subsequent changes to the fair value of the contingent consideration are recognised in profit or loss. Some business combinations in the period have been determined provisionally as the Group is currently in the process of measuring the fair value of the net assets acquired. The identifiable net assets have therefore initially been recognised at their provisional value. Adjustments during the measurement period have been recorded as if they had been known at the date of the combination and comparative information for the prior year has been restated where applicable. Adjustments to provisional values only include information relating to events and circumstances existing at the acquisition date and which, had they been known, would have affected the amounts recognised at that date. After that period, adjustments to initial measurement are only made to correct an error. Acquisitions between 1 January 2004 and 1 January 2010 For acquisitions between 1 January 2004 and 1 January 2010, goodwill represents the excess of the cost of the acquisition over the Group’s interest in the recognised amount (generally fair value) of the identifiable assets, liabilities and contingent liabilities of the acquire. When the excess was negative, a bargain purchase gain was recognised immediately in profit or loss. Transaction costs, other than those associated with the issue of debt or equity securities, that the Group incurred in connection with business combinations were capitalised as part of the cost of the acquisition.  226  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  14   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUALEDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  Accounting for acquisitions of non-controlling interests From 1 January 2010, acquisitions of non-controlling interests are accounted for as transactions with owners in their capacity as owners and therefore no goodwill is recognised as a result of such transactions. The adjustments to non-controlling interests are based on a proportionate amount of the net assets of the subsidiary. Previously, goodwill was recognised on the acquisition of non-controlling interests in a subsidiary, which represented the excess of the cost of the additional investment over the carrying amount of the interest in the net assets acquired at the date of the transaction. Investments in foreign operations The assets and liabilities of foreign operations, including goodwill and fair value adjustments arising on acquisition, are translated to Euro at exchange rates at the reporting date. The income and expenses of foreign operations, are translated to Euro at exchange rates at the dates of the transactions. Foreign currency differences are recognised in other comprehensive income in the translation reserve. On disposal of a foreign subsidiary, the related exchange differences previously recognised in reserves, are accounted for in the income statement. as part of the profit or loss on disposal. When the settlement of a monetary item receivable from or payable to a foreign operation is neither planned nor likely in the foreseeable future, foreign exchange gains and losses arising from such a monetary item are considered to form part of a net investment in a foreign operation and are recognised in other comprehensive income, and presented in the translation reserve in equity. Balances and transactions eliminated on consolidation Inter-company balances and transactions, including any unrealised gains and losses on transactions between group companies, are eliminated in preparing the consolidated financial statements. Unrealised gains and losses arising from transactions with associates and jointly controlled entities are eliminated to the extent of the Group's interest in those entities. Common control transactions The accounting for transactions among entities under common control is excluded from IFRS 3. Consequently, in the absence of specific guidance, within IFRSs, the EDP Renováveis Group has developed an accounting policy for such transactions, as considered appropriate. According to the Group's policy, business combinations among entities under common control are accounted for in the consolidated financial statements using the EDP consolidated book values of the acquired company (subgroup). The difference between the carrying amount of the net assets received and the consideration paid, is recognised in equity. Put options related to non-controlling interests EDP Renováveis Group records written put options at the date of acquisition of a business combination or at a subsequent date as an advance acquisition of these interests, recording a financial liability for the present value of the best estimate of the amount payable, irrespective of the estimated probability that the options will be exercised. The difference between this amount and the amount corresponding to the percentage of the interests held in the identifiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Until 31 December 2009, in years subsequent to initial recognition, the changes in the liability due to the effect of the financial discount are recognised as a financial expense in the consolidated income statement, and the remaining changes are recognised as an adjustment to the cost of the business combination. Where applicable, dividends paid to minority shareholders up to the date the options are exercised are also recorded as adjustments to the cost of the business combination. In the event that the options are not exercised, the transaction would be recorded as a sale of interests to minority shareholders. As from January 2010, the Group applies IAS 27 (2008) to new put options related to non-controlling interests and, therefore, subsequent changes in the carrying amount of the put liability are recognised in profit or loss. Business combinations achieved in stages In a business combination achieved in stages, the excess of the aggregate of (i) the consideration transferred, (ii) the amount of any non-controlling interest recognized in the acquiree (iii) the fair value of the previously held equity interest in the acquired business; over the net of amounts of the identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed, is recognized as goodwill. If applicable, the defect, after evaluating the consideration transferred, the amount of any non-controlling interest recognized in the acquiree, the fair value of the previously held equity interest in the acquired business; and the valuation of the net assets acquired, is recognized in the income statement. The Group recognizes the difference between the fair value of the previously held equity interest in the acquired business and the carrying value in consolidated results according to its classification. Additionally, the Group reclassifies the deferred amounts in other comprehensive income relating to the previously held equity interest to the income statement or consolidated reserves, according to their nature.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  227 15  227   ENERGY ENERGY ENERGY AS NEWART AS THETHE NEWART AS THE NEWART  c) Foreign currency transactions Foreign currency transactions are translated at the exchange rates at the dates of the transactions. Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currency are translated into Euros at the exchange rates at the balance sheet date. These exchange differences arising on translation are recognised in the income statement. Foreign currency non-monetary assets and liabilities accounted for at historical cost are translated using the exchange rates at the dates of the transactions. Foreign currency non-monetary assets and liabilities stated at fair value are translated into Euros at the exchange rates at the dates the fair value was determined.  d) Derivative financial instruments and hedge accounting Derivative financial instruments are recognised on the trade date at fair value. Subsequently, the fair value of derivative financial instruments is re-measured on a regular basis, being the gains or losses on re-measurement recognised directly in the income statement, except for derivatives designated as hedging instruments. The recognition of the resulting gains or losses on re-measurement of the derivatives designated as hedging instruments depends on the nature of the risk being hedged and of the hedge model used. The fair value of derivative financial instruments corresponds to their market value, if available, or to quotes indicated by external entities through the use of valuation techniques, which are compared in each date of report to fair values available in common financial information platforms.  Hedge accounting The Group uses financial instruments to hedge interest and foreign exchange risks resulting from its operational and financing activities. The derivate financial instruments that do not qualify for hedge accounting are recorded as for trading. The derivatives that are designated as hedging instruments are recorded at fair value, being the gains and losses recognised in accordance with the hedge accounting model adopted by the Group. Hedge accounting is used when: (i) At the inception of the hedge, the hedge relationship is identified and documented; (ii) The hedge is expected to be highly effective; (iii) The effectiveness of the hedge can be reliably measured; (iv) The hedge is revalued on an on-going basis and is considered to be highly effective over the reporting period; and (v) The forecast transactions hedged are highly probable and represent a risk to changes in cash flows that could affect the income statement. Derivatives are recognised initially at fair value; attributable transaction costs are recognised in profit or loss as incurred. Subsequent to initial recognition, derivatives are measured at fair value, and changes therein are accounted for as described below. Cash flow hedge The effective portion of the changes in the fair value of the derivative financial instruments that are designated as hedging instruments in a cash flow hedge model is recognised in equity. The gains or losses relating to the ineffective portion of the hedging relationship are recognised in the income statement in the moment they occur. The cumulative gains or losses recognised in equity are also reclassified to the income statement over the periods in which the hedged item will affect the income statement. When the forecast transaction hedge results in the recognition of a non-financial asset, the gains or losses recorded in equity are included in the acquisition cost of the asset. When a hedging instrument expires or is sold, or when a hedge no longer meets the criteria for hedge accounting, any cumulative gain or loss recognised in equity at that time stays recognised in equity until the hedged transaction also affects the income statement. When the forecasted transaction is no longer expected to occur, the cumulative gains or losses recognized in equity are recorded in the income statement. Net investment hedge The net investment hedge is applied on a consolidated basis to investments in subsidiaries in foreign currencies. The exchange differences recorded against exchange differences arising on consolidation are offset by the exchange differences arising from the foreign currency borrowings used for the acquisition of those subsidiaries. If the hedging instrument is a derivative, the gains or losses arising from fair value changes are also recorded against exchange differences arising on consolidation. The ineffective portion of the hedging relation is recognised in the income statement.  228  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  16   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  e) Other financial assets The Group classifies its other financial assets at acquisition date in the following categories: Loans and receivable Loans and receivable are initially recognised at their fair value and subsequently are measured at amortised cost less impairment losses. Impairment losses are recorded based on the valuation of estimated losses from non-collection of loans and receivable at the balance sheet date. Impairment losses are recognised in the income statement, and can be reversed if the estimated losses decrease in a later period. Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss This category includes: (i) financial assets held for trading, which are those acquired for the purpose of being traded in the short term, and (ii) financial assets that are designated at fair value through profit or loss at inception. Available-for-sale investments Available-for-sale financial assets are non-derivative financial assets that are designated as available-for-sale and that are not classified in any of the other categories. The Group’s investments in equity securities are classified as available-for-sale financial assets. Initial recognition, measurement and derecognition Purchases and sales of: (i) financial assets at fair value through profit or loss and (ii) available-for-sale investments, are recognised on trade date, the date on which the Group commits to purchase or sell the assets. Financial assets are initially recognised at fair value plus transaction costs except for financial assets at fair value through profit or loss, in which case these transaction costs are directly recognised in the income statement. Financial assets are derecognised when: (i) the contractual rights to receive their cash flows have expired, (ii) the Group has transferred substantially all risks and rewards of ownership or (iii) although retaining some, but not substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership, the Group has transferred the control over the assets. Subsequent measurement After initial recognition, financial assets at fair value through profit or loss are subsequently carried at fair value and gains and losses arising from changes in their fair value are included in the income statement in the period in which they arise. Available-for-sale financial assets are also subsequently carried at fair value. However, gains and losses arising from changes in their fair value are recognised directly in equity, until the financial assets are derecognised or impaired. When this occurs, the cumulative gains or losses previously recognised in equity are immediately recognised in the income statement. Foreign exchange differences arising from equity investments classified as available-for-sale are also recognised in equity. Interest calculated using the effective interest rate method and dividends, are recognised in the income statement. The fair values on quoted investments in active markets are based on current bid prices. For unlisted securities the Group determines the fair value through: (i) valuation techniques, including the use of recent arm’s length transactions or discounted cash flow analysis and (ii) valuation assumptions based on market information. Financial instruments whose fair value cannot be reliably measured are carried at cost. Reclassifications between categories The Group does not reclassify, after initial recognition, a financial instrument into or out of the fair value through profit or loss category. Impairment At each balance sheet date, an assessment is performed as to whether there is objective evidence of impairment, including any impairment resulting in an adverse effect on estimated future cash flows of the financial asset or group of financial assets. If there is objective evidence of impairment, the recoverable amount of the financial asset is determined, and the impairment loss is recognised in the income statement. A financial asset or a group of financial assets is impaired if there is objective evidence of impairment as a result of one or more events that occurred after their initial recognition, such as: (i) in the case of listed securities, a significant or prolonged decline in the listed price of the security, and (ii) in the case of unlisted securities, when that event (or events) has an impact on the estimated amount of the future cash flows of the financial asset or group of financial assets, that can be reliably estimated. Evaluating the existence of objective evidence of impairment involves judgement, in which case the Group considers, among other factors, price volatility and current economic situation. Thus, when listed securities are concerned, it is considered as continuous a devaluation in the listed price of the security for a period over 24 months and as significant a devaluation of the security's value above 40%.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  229 17   ENERGY ENERGY ENERGY AS THE THE NEWART AS NEWART AS THE NEWART  If there is objective evidence of impairment on available-for-sale investments, the cumulative potential loss recognised in fair values reserves, corresponding to the difference between the acquisition cost and the fair value at the balance sheet date, less any impairment loss on that financial asset previously recognised in the income statement, is transferred to the income statement.  f) Financial liabilities An instrument is classified as a financial liability when it contains a contractual obligation to transfer cash or another financial asset, independently from its legal form. These financial liabilities are recognised (i) initially at fair value less transaction costs and (ii) subsequently at amortised cost, using the effective interest rate method. The Group derecognises the whole or part of a financial liability when the obligations included in the contract have been satisfied or the Group is legally released of the fundamental obligation related to this liability either through a legal process or by the creditor.  g) Borrowing costs Borrowing costs that are directly attributable to the acquisition or construction of assets are capitalised as part of the cost of the assets. A qualifying asset is an asset that necessarily takes a substantial period of time to get ready for its intended use or sale. To the extent that funds are borrowed generally, the amount of borrowing costs eligible for capitalisation are determined by applying a capitalisation rate to the expenditures on these assets. The capitalisation rate corresponds to the weighted average of the borrowing costs applicable to the borrowings of the enterprise that are outstanding during the period, other than borrowings made specifically for the purpose of obtaining a qualifying asset. The amount of borrowing costs capitalised during a period does not exceed the amount of borrowing costs incurred during the period. The capitalisation of borrowing costs commences when expenditures for the asset are being incurred, borrowing costs have been incurred and activities necessary to prepare all or part of the assets for their intended use or sale are in progress. Capitalisation ceases when substantially all the activities necessary to prepare the qualifying assets for their intended use or sale are completed. Capitalisation of borrowing costs shall be suspended during extended periods in which active development is interrupted.  h) Property, plant and equipment Property, plant and equipment are stated at acquisition cost less accumulated depreciation and impairment losses. Cost includes expenditure that is directly attributable to the acquisition of the asset. In case of projects in a development stage, costs are only capitalized when it is probable that the project will be finally built. If due to changes in regulation or other circumstances costs capitalized are derecognized from property plant and equipment, they are recognized in the profit and loss caption of “Other expenses”. Replacements or renewals of complete items are recognized as increases in the value of property, plant and equipment and the items replaced or renewed are derecognized and recognized in the “Other expenses” caption. The cost of self-constructed assets includes the cost of materials and direct labour, any other costs directly attributable to bringing the asset to a working condition for its intended use, and the costs of dismantling and removing the items and restoring the site on which they are located. Cost also may include transfers from equity of any gain or loss on qualifying cash flow hedges of foreign currency purchases of property, plant and equipment. Purchased software that is integral to the functionality of the related equipment is capitalised as part of that equipment. The cost of acquisition includes interest on external financing and personnel costs and other internal expenses directly or indirectly related to work in progress accrued solely during the period of construction. The cost of production is capitalised by charging costs attributable to the asset as own work capitalised under financial expenses and personnel costs and employee benefit expense in the consolidated income statement. When parts of an item of property, plant and equipment have different useful lives, they are accounted for as separate items (major components) of property, plant and equipment. Subsequent costs are recognised as separate assets only when it is probable that future economic benefits associated with the item will flow to the Group. All repair and maintenance costs are charged to the income statement during the financial period in which they are incurred. The Group assesses assets impairment, whenever events or circumstances may indicate that the book value of the asset exceeds its recoverable amount, the impairment being recognised in the income statement.  230  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  18   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUALEDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  Land is not depreciated. Depreciation on the other assets is calculated using the straight-line method over their estimated useful lives, as follows: Number of years  Buildings and other constructions Plant and machinery: - Renewable assets - Other plant and machinery Transport equipment Office equipment and tools Other tangible fixed assets  8 to 40 30 4 to 12 3 to 5 2 to 10 3 to 10  At the end of December 2016, EDPR Group has changed the useful life of the renewable assets from 25 to 30 years (see note 3).  i) Intangible assets The Group´s intangible assets are booked at acquisition cost less accumulated amortisation and impairment losses. The Group does not own intangible assets with indefinite lives. The Group performs impairment tests, whenever events or circumstances may indicate that the book value of the asset exceeds its recoverable amount, being any impairment recognised in the income statement. Acquisition and development of software Acquired computer software licenses are capitalised on the basis of the costs incurred to acquire and bring to use the specific software. These costs are amortised on the basis of their expected useful lives. Costs that are directly associated with the development of identifiable specific software applications by the Group, and that will probably generate economic benefits beyond one year, are recognised as intangible assets. These costs include employee costs directly associated with the development of the referred software and are amortised using the straight-line method during their expected useful lives. Maintenance costs of software are charged to the income statement when incurred. Industrial property and other rights The amortisation of industrial property and other rights is calculated using the straight-line method for an expected useful live expected of less than 6 years. Green Certificates As per Romanian Regulatory Framework, there's a category of Green Certificates (GCs) which although granted are restricted for sale until 2017 (solar) and 2018 (wind). These deferred GCs are recognised as intangible assets when generated at fair market value. These GCs will be offset as they will be collected. Power purchase agreements Acquired Power Purchase Agreements (PPAs) are booked as intangible assets and amortised using the straight-line method according with the duration of the contract.  j) Non-current assets held for sale and discontinued operations Non-current assets or groups of non-current assets held for sale (groups of assets and related liabilities that include at least one noncurrent asset) are classified as held for sale when their carrying amounts will be recovered mainly through sale, the assets or groups of assets are available for immediate sale and the sale is highly probable. The Group also classifies as non-current assets held for sale, non-current assets or groups of assets acquired exclusively for its subsequent resale, that are available for immediate sale and the sale is highly probable. The measurement of all non-current assets and all assets and liabilities included in a disposal group, is adjusted in accordance with the applicable IFRS standards, immediately before their classification as held for sale. Subsequently, these assets or disposal groups are measured at the lowest between their carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell.  k) Impairment of non-financial assets The carrying amounts of the Group's non-financial assets, other than inventories and deferred tax assets, are reviewed at each reporting date to determine whether there is any indication of impairment. If any such indication exists, the asset's recoverable amount is then estimated. For goodwill the recoverable amount is estimated at each reporting date. The recoverable amount of an asset or cash-generating unit is the greater of its value in use and its fair value less costs to sell. In assessing value in use, the estimated future cash flows are discounted to their present value using a post-tax discount rate that reflects current market assessments of the time value of money and the risks specific to the asset. For the purpose of impairment testing, assets are grouped together into the smallest group of assets that generates cash inflows from continuing use that are largely independent of the cash inflows of other assets or groups of assets (the cash-generating unit). The goodwill  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  231 19   ENERGY AS THE NEWART ENERGY AS THE NEWART  acquired in a business combination, for the purpose of impairment testing, is allocated to cash-generating units which are expected to benefit from the synergies of the combination. An impairment loss is recognised if the carrying amount of an asset or its cash-generating unit exceeds its estimated recoverable amount. Impairment losses are recognised in profit or loss. Impairment losses recognised in respect of cashgenerating units are allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the units and then to reduce the carrying amount of the other assets in the unit (group of units) on a pro-rata basis. An impairment loss in respect of goodwill is not reversed. In respect of other assets, impairment losses recognised in prior periods are assessed at each reporting date for any indications that the loss has decreased or no longer exists. An impairment loss is reversed if there has been a change in circumstances that caused the impairment. An impairment loss is reversed only to the extent that the asset's carrying amount does not exceed the carrying amount that would have been determined, net of depreciation or amortisation, if no impairment loss had been recognised.  l) Leases The Group classifies its lease agreements as finance leases or operating leases taking into consideration the substance of the transaction rather than its legal form. A lease is classified as a finance lease if it transfers to the lessee substantially all the risks and rewards incidental to ownership. All other leases are classified as operating leases. Operating leases Lease payments are recognised as an expense and charged to the income statement in the period to which they relate.  m) Inventories Inventories are stated at the lower of the acquisition cost and net realisable value. The cost of inventories includes purchases, conversion and other costs incurred in bringing the inventories to their present location and condition. The net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less the estimated selling costs. The cost of inventories is assigned by using the weighted average method.  n) Classification of assets and liabilities as current and non-current The Group classifies assets and liabilities in the consolidated statement of financial position as current and non-current. Current assets and liabilities are determined as follows: Assets are classified as current when they are expected to be realised or are intended for sale or consumption in the Group’s normal operating cycle, they are held primarily for the purpose of trading, they are expected to be realised within twelve months of the balance sheet date or are cash or a cash equivalent, unless the assets may not be exchanged or used to settle a liability for at least twelve months from the balance sheet date. Liabilities are classified as current when they are expected to be settled in the Group’s normal operating cycle, they are held primarily for the purpose of trading, they are due to be settled within twelve months of the balance sheet date or the Group does not have an unconditional right to defer settlement of the liability for at least twelve months after the reporting period. Financial liabilities are classified as current when they are due to be settled within twelve months after the reporting period, even if the original term was for a period longer than twelve months, and an agreement to refinance, or to reschedule payments, on a long-term basis is completed after the reporting period and before the consolidated financial statements are authorised for issue.  o) Provisions Provisions are recognised when: (i) the Group has a present legal or constructive obligation, (ii) it is probable that settlement will be required in the future and (iii) a reliable estimate of the obligation can be made. Dismantling and decommissioning provisions The Group recognises dismantling and decommissioning provisions for property, plant and equipment when a legal or contractual obligation is settled to dismantling and decommissioning those assets at the end of their useful life. Consequently, the Group has booked provisions for property, plant and equipment related with renewables assets, for the expected cost of restoring sites and land to its original condition. The provisions correspond to the present value of the expenditure expected to be required to settle the obligation and are recognised as part of the initial cost or an adjustment to the cost of the respective asset, being depreciated on a straight-line basis over the asset useful life.  232  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  20   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  The assumptions used for 2016 are: Europe  North America  South America  25,873 33,954  26,715 -  28,954 29,915  35,603 19,787  33,942 -  [0.00% - 1.77%] [1.51% - 3.57%] [0.65% - 3.87%] -  Average cost per MW (Euros) Wind (Steel structure) Wind (Concrete structure) Salvage value per MW (Euros) Wind (Steel structure) Wind (Concrete structure) Discount rate Euro PLN USD CAD RON BRL Inflation rate Euro zone Poland Romania USA Canada Brazil Capitalisation (number of years)  [0.72% - 2.94%] [0.72% - 2.94%] [2.00% - 2.30%] [2.00% - 2.30%] 30  46,338 17,421 [11.91% - 12.47%] [4.20% - 5.64%] 30  [1.01% - 2.35%] [1.45% - 2.40%] [2.30% - 2.70%] 30  The assumptions used for 2015 were: Europe  North America  South America  14,000 14,000  21,618 -  16,304 16,304  41,000 41,000  29,724 -  30,305 30,305  [1.90% - 2.50%] [3.00% - 4.00%] [4.50% - 5.65%] -  [3.85% - 5.00%] [3.35% - 4.25%] -  12.75%  [1.75% - 1.85%] 0.90% [1.75% - 1.85%] 25  Average cost per MW (Euros) Wind (Steel structure) Wind (Concrete structure) Salvage value per MW (Euros) Wind (Steel structure) Wind (Concrete structure) Discount rate Euro PLN USD CAD RON BRL Inflation rate Euro zone Poland Romania USA Canada Brazil Capitalisation (number of years)  2.50% 2.25% 25  5.4% 25  Due to the change of the useful life of the renewable assets from 25 to 30 years (see note 2 h and 3) the capitalisation rate (number of years) of the dismantling and decommissioning provisions has changed to 30 years with effects December 2016. Decommissioning and dismantling provisions are remeasured on an annual basis based on the best estimate of the settlement amount. In this sense, EDPR’s technical department performed an in-depth analysis taking into account the reality of the EDPR’s fleet. This analysis leads to the conclusion that the average cost per megawatt and salvage value of the renewables assets have required to be updated, according to the values disclosed above, with effects December 2016. The unwinding of the discount at each balance sheet date is charged to the income statement. Tax liabilities Liabilities for payment of taxes or levies related to an activity of the Group are recognized as the activity which triggers the payment is carried out, according to the laws regulating such taxes or levies. However, in the cases of taxes or levies with right of reimbursement of the amount already paid proportionally to the period of time in which there is no activity or the asset which triggers the payment is no longer owned, liabilities are recognized on a proportional basis.  p) Recognition of costs and revenue Costs and revenues are recorded in the year to which they refer regardless of when paid or received, in accordance with the accrual concept. Differences between amounts received and paid and the corresponding revenue and expenditure are recorded under other assets and other liabilities. Revenue comprises the amounts invoiced on the sale of products or of services rendered, net of value added tax, rebates and discounts, after elimination of intra-group sales. Revenue from energy sales is recognised in the period that energy is generated and transferred to customers. Deferred Green Certificates (GCs) are recognised as revenue at fair market value.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  233 21  233   ENERGY ENERGY AS NEWART ENERGY AS THE THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  q) Financial results Financial results include interest payable on borrowings, interest receivable on funds invested, dividend income, unwinding of the discount of provisions and written put options to non-controlling interests, foreign exchange gains and losses, gains and losses on financial instruments and the accrual of tax equity estimated interest over outstanding liability. Interest income is recognised in the income statement based on the effective interest rate method. Dividend income is recognised in the income statement on the date the entity's right to receive payments is established.  r) Income tax Income tax expense comprises current and deferred tax. Current tax and deferred tax are recognised in profit or loss except to the extent that it relates to a items recognized directly in equity, in which case is also recognized in equity. Current tax is the expected tax payable or receivable on the taxable income or loss for the year, using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted at the reporting date, and any adjustment to tax payable in respect of previous years. Deferred tax is recognised in respect of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for taxation purposes. Deferred tax is not recognised for the following temporary differences: the initial recognition of assets or liabilities in a transaction that is not a business combination and that affects neither accounting nor taxable profit or loss, and differences relating to investments in subsidiaries and jointly controlled entities to the extent that it is probable that they will not reverse in the foreseeable future. In addition, deferred tax is not recognised for taxable temporary differences arising on the initial recognition of goodwill. Deferred tax is measured at the tax rates that are expected to be applied to temporary differences when they reverse, based on the laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted by the reporting date. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset if there is a legally enforceable right to offset current tax liabilities and assets, and they relate to income taxes levied by the same tax authority on the same taxable entity, or on different tax entities, but they intend to settle current tax liabilities and assets on a net basis or their tax assets and liabilities will be realised simultaneously. A deferred tax asset is recognised for unused tax losses, tax credits and deductible temporary differences, to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profits will be available against which they can be utilised. Deferred tax assets are reviewed at each reporting date and are reduced to the extent that it is no longer probable that the related tax benefit will be realised.  s) Earnings per share Basic earnings per share are calculated by dividing net profit attributable to equity holders of the parent company by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the year, excluding the average number of ordinary shares purchased by the Group and held as treasury stock.  t) Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents include balances with maturity of less than three months from the date of acquisition, including cash and deposits in banks. This caption also includes other short-term, highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and specific demand deposits in relation to institutional partnerships that are funds required to be held in escrow sufficient to pay the remaining construction related costs of projects in institutional equity partnerships in U.S.A., in the next twelve months. The Group classifies as cash and cash equivalents the balance of the current accounts with the Group formalized under cashpooling agreements.  u) Government grants Government grants are recognised initially as deferred income under non-current liabilities when there is reasonable assurance that they will be received and that the Group will comply with the conditions associated with the grant. Grants that compensate the Group for expenses incurred are recognised in profit or loss on a systematic basis in the same periods in which the expenses are recognised.  v) Environmental issues The Group takes measures to prevent, reduce or repair the damage caused to the environment by its activities. Expenses derived from environmental activities are recognised as other operating expenses in the period in which they are incurred.  w) Institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms The Group has entered in several partnerships with institutional investors in the United States, through limited liability Company operating agreements that apportion the cash flows generated by the wind farms between the investors and the Company and allocates the tax benefits, which include Production Tax Credits (PTCs), Investment Tax Credits (ITC) and accelerated depreciation, largely to the investor.  234  234  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  22   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUALEDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  The institutional investors purchase their minority partnership interests for an upfront cash payment with an agreed targeted internal rate of return over the period that the tax credits are generated. This anticipated return is computed based on the total anticipated benefit that the institutional investors will receive and includes the value of PTC’s / ITC's, allocated taxable income or loss and cash distributions received. The control and management of these wind farms are a responsibility of EDPR Group and they are fully consolidated in these financial statements. The upfront cash payment received is recognised under ‘Liabilities arising from institutional partnerships’ and subsequently measured at amortised cost. This liability is reduced by the value of tax benefits provided and cash distributions made to the institutional investors during the contracted period. The value of the tax benefits delivered, primarily accelerated depreciation and ITC are recognized as Income from institutional partnerships on a pro-rata basis over the 25 year useful life of the underlying projects (see note 7). The value of the PTC's delivered are recorded as generated. This liability is increased by an interest accrual that is based on the outstanding liability balance and the targeted internal rate of return agreed. After the Flip Date, the institutional investor retains a non-significant interest for the duration of the structure. This noncontrolling interest is entitled to distributions ranging from 2.5 % to 6 % and taxable income allocations ranging from 5% to 17%. EDPR NA has an option to purchase the institutional investor’s residual interest at fair market value during a defined period following the flip date. A liability to provide for the institutional investors’ minority interest is accreted on a straight-line basis from the funding date through the Flip Date.  03. Critical accounting estimates and judgments in applying accounting policies The IFRS set forth a range of accounting treatments and require the Board of Directors to apply judgment and make estimates in deciding which treatment is most appropriate. The main accounting estimates and judgements used in applying the accounting policies are discussed in this note in order to improve the understanding of how their application affects the Group’s reported results and disclosures. A broader description of the accounting policies employed by the Group is disclosed in note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements. Although estimates are calculated by the Board of Directors based on the best information available at 31 December 2016 and 2015, future events may require changes to these estimates in subsequent years. Any effect on the financial statements of adjustments to be made in subsequent years would be recognised prospectively. Considering that in many cases there are alternatives to the accounting treatment adopted by EDP Renováveis, the Group’s reported results could differ if a different treatment was chosen. EDP Renováveis believes that the choices made are appropriate and that the financial statements are presented fairly, in all material respects, the Group’s financial position and results. The alternative outcomes discussed below are presented solely to assist the reader in understanding the financial statements and are not intended to suggest that other alternatives or estimates would be more appropriate. Fair value of derivatives Fair values are based on listed market prices, if available, otherwise fair value is determined either by dealer prices (both for that transaction or for similar instruments traded) or by pricing models, based on net present value of estimated future cash flows which take into account market conditions for the underlying instruments, time value, yield curves and volatility factors. These pricing models may require assumptions or judgments in estimating fair values. Consequently, the use of a different model or of different assumptions or judgments in applying a particular model may have produced different financial results for a particular period. Fair value measurement of contingent consideration The contingent consideration, from a business combination or a sale of a minority interest while retaining control is measured at fair value at the acquisition date as part of the business combination or at the date of the sale in the event of a sale of a minority interest. The contingent consideration is subsequently remeasured at fair value at balance sheet date. Fair value is based on discounted cash flows. The main assumptions consider the probability of achieving each objective and the discount factor, corresponding to the best estimates of management at each balance sheet date. Changes in assumptions could have impact on the values of contingent assets and liabilities recognized in the financial statements. Review of the useful life of assets related to production According to IAS 8, estimates must be revised when new information becomes available which indicates a change in circumstances upon which the estimates were formed. It is observable that an extension in the useful life of renewable assets is the industry trend. During 2016, in the light of this fact, EDPR management has decided to conduct an in depth review of the useful lifetime of its renewable assets to determine what is the most appropriate depreciation lifetime to consider in its local and IFRS financial statements. The analysis performed covers technical (through internal and third party technical analysis), financial, economic and other considerations such as contractual or regulatory constraints. Based on these results, at the end of December 2016, EDPR has approved to revise the current estimate extending the useful life of its renewable assets up to 30 years, consequently, leading to a prospective change in the depreciation charge. Although useful life may have some level of  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  235 23  235   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  discrete asset variation depending on the specific site specificities, it is judged reasonable and accurate to use the standard of 30 years for the entire fleet. Impairment of non-financial assets Impairment test are performed whenever there is an indication that the recoverable amount of property, plant, equipment and intangible assets is less than the corresponding net book value of assets. On an annual basis, the Group reviews the assumptions used to assess the existence of impairment in goodwill resulting from acquisitions of shares in subsidiaries. The assumptions used are sensitive to changes in macroeconomic indicators and business assumptions used by management. The net interest in associates is reviewed when circumstances indicate the existence of impairment. Considering that estimated recoverable amounts related to property, plant and equipment, intangible assets and goodwill are based on the best information available, changes in the estimates and judgments could change the impairment test results which could affects the Group’s reported results. Income taxes The Group is subject to income taxes in numerous jurisdictions. Significant interpretations and estimates are required in determining the global amount for income taxes. There are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain during the ordinary course of business. Different interpretations and estimates would result in a different level of income taxes, current and deferred, recognised in the period. Tax Authorities are entitled to review EDP Renováveis, and its subsidiaries’ determination of its annual taxable earnings, for a determined period that may be extended in case there are tax losses carried forward. Therefore, it is possible that some additional taxes may be assessed, mainly as a result of differences in interpretation of the tax law. However, the EDP Renováveis and its subsidiaries, do not anticipate any significant changes to the income tax booked in the financial statements. Dismantling and decommissioning provisions The Board of Directors considers that Group has contractual obligations with the dismantling and decommissioning of property, plant and equipment related to wind electricity generation. For these responsibilities the Group has recorded provisions for the expected cost of restoring sites and land to its original condition. The provisions correspond to the present value of the expenditure expected to be required to settle the obligation. EDPR’s technical department performed an in-depth analysis taking into account the reality of the EDPR’s fleet. This analysis leads to the conclusion that the average cost per megawatt and salvage value of the renewables assets requires to be updated, with effects December 2016 (see note 2 o). Additionally, due to the change of the useful life of the renewable assets from 25 to 30 years (see note 2 h) the capitalisation rate (number of years) of the dismantling and decommissioning provisions has changed to 30 years with effects December 2016. The use of different assumptions in estimates and judgments referred may have produced different results from those that have been considered. Green Certificates As a consequence of the regulatory framework in Romania related to Green Certificates (GCs), the Group has the following assumptions: (i) For estimating the price of GCs, the model is based on current regulation including the latest developments published in the last months and estimations on renewable capacity to be added in the following years; (ii) The GC model determines whether there will be excess or deficit of GCs to evaluate the price to apply; "In order to determine whether there will be excess or deficit of GCs, we compare demand with supply of GCs. Demand of GCs is calculated by multiplying gross electricity consumption and quotas of renewable electricity. Electricity demand growth is based in latest external estimates, including those from Romanian regulator ANRE. EDPR has made sensitivity analyses to the quotas and has assumed a conservative scenario that considers the latest regulatory changes. Entities included in the consolidation perimeter In order to determine which entities must be included in the consolidation perimeter, the Group evaluates whether it is exposed, or has rights, to variable returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee. This evaluation requires judgement, assumptions and estimates in order to conclude whether the Group is in fact exposed to variable returns and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the investee. Other assumptions and estimates could lead to a different consolidation perimeter of the Group, with direct impact in the consolidated financial statements.  236  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  24   ANNUAL REPORT  ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  04. Financial risk management policies The businesses of EDP Renováveis Group are exposed to a variety of financial risks, including the effects of changes in market prices, foreign exchange and interest rates. Main financial risks arise from interest-rate and the exchange-rate exposures. The unpredictability of the financial markets is analysed on an on-going basis in accordance with EDPR’s risk management policy. Financial instruments are used to minimize potential adverse effects resulting from interest rates and foreign exchange rates risks on EDP Renováveis financial performance. The Board of Directors of EDP Renováveis is responsible for the definition of general risk-management principles and the establishment of exposure limits. Recommendations to manage financial risks of EDP Renováveis Group are proposed by EDPR's Finance and Global Risk Departments and discussed in the Financial Risk Committee of EDP Renováveis, which is held quarterly. The pre-agreed strategy is shared with the Finance Department of EDP - Energias de Portugal, S.A., to verify the accordance with the policies approved by the Board of Directors of EDP. The evaluation of appropriate hedging mechanisms and the execution are outsourced to the Finance Department of EDP. All transactions undertaken using derivative financial instruments require the prior approval of the Board of Directors, which defines the parameters of each transaction and approves the formal documents describing their objectives. Exchange-rate risk management EDPR/EDP Group’s Financial Department are responsible for managing the foreign exchange exposure of the Group, seeking to mitigate the impact of exchange rate fluctuations on the net assets and net profits of the Group, using foreign exchange derivatives, foreign exchange debt and/or other hedging structures with symmetrical exposure characteristics to those of the hedged item. The effectiveness of these hedges is reassessed and monitored throughout their lives. EDPR operates internationally and is exposed to the exchange-rate risk resulting from investments in foreign subsidiaries. With the objective of minimizing the impact of exchange rates fluctuations, EDP Renováveis general policy is to fund each project in the currency of the operating cash flows generated by the project. Currently, the main currency exposure is the U.S. Dollar, resulting from the shareholding in EDPR NA. With the increasing capacity in other geographies, EDPR is also becoming exposed to other currencies (Brazilian Real, Zloty, New Romanian Leu, British Pound and Canadian Dollar). To hedge the risk originated with net investment in EDPR NA, EDP Renováveis entered into a CIRS in USD/EUR with EDP Branch and also uses financial debt expressed in USD. Following the same strategy adopted to hedge these investments in USA, EDP Renováveis has also entered into CIRS in BRL/EUR and in PLN/EUR to hedge the investments in Brazil and Poland (see note 35). Sensitivity analysis - Foreign exchange rate As a consequence a depreciation/appreciation of 10% in the foreign currency exchange rate, with reference to 31 December 2016 and 2015, would originate an increase/(decrease) in EDP Renováveis Group income statement and equity before taxes, as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016 Equity  Profit or loss +10% USD / EUR  -10%  10,822 10,822  -13,227 -13,227  +10%  -10%  -  -  31 Dec 2015 Profit or loss  Equity  +10%  -10%  -359 -359  439 439  USD / EUR  +10% -  -10% -  This analysis assumes that all other variables, namely interest rates, remain unchanged. Interest rate risk management The Group’s operating cash flows are substantially independent from the fluctuation in interest-rate markets. The purpose of the interest-rate risk management strategy is to reduce the exposure of debt cash flows to market fluctuations. As such, whenever considered necessary and in accordance to the Group's policy, interest-rate financial instruments are contracted to hedge interest rate risks. These financial instruments hedge cash flows associated with future interest payments, converting floating rate loans into fixed rate loans.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  25 237 237   ENERGY AS THE NEWART ENERGY AS THE NEWART  between changes in fair value of the hedging instrument and changes in fair value of the interest-rate risk or upcoming cash flows. The EDP Renováveis Group has a portfolio of interest-rate derivatives with maturities up to 10 years. The Financial Department of EDP Group undertakes sensitivity analyses of the fair value of financial instruments to interest-rate fluctuations or upcoming cash flows. financial instruments. Sensitivity analysis - Interest rates by the Group, contracting derivative financial instruments to mitigate this risk. Based on the EDPR Group debt portfolio and the related derivative financial instruments used to hedge associated interest rate risk, as well as on the shareholder loans received by EDP Renováveis, a change of 50 basis points in the interest rates with before taxes, as follows: 31 Dec 2016 Equity  Thousand Euros Profit or loss - 50 BPS Cash flow hedge derivatives Unhedged debt (variable interest rates)  - 50 BPS  -  -  8,334  -8,668  -1,119  1,119  -  -  1,119  8,334  31 Dec 2015 Equity  Thousand Euros Profit or loss - 50 BPS Cash flow hedge derivatives Unhedged debt (variable interest rates)  - 50 BPS  -  -  15,668  -16,388  -594  594  -  -  594  15,668  This analysis assumes that all other variables, namely foreign exchange rates, remain unchanged. Counter-party credit-rate risk management in financial transactions The EDP Renováveis Group counter-party risk exposure in financial and non-financial transactions is managed by an analysis of technical capacity, competitiveness and probability of default to the counter-party. EDP Renováveis has defined a counter-party risk policy inspired in Basel III, which is implemented across all departments in all EDP Renováveis geographies. EDP Renováveis Group is exposed to counter-party risk in financial derivatives transactions and in energy sales (electricity, GC and RECs). Counterparties in derivatives and financial transactions are restricted to high-quality credit institutions or to the EDP Group. Most relevant counterparties in derivatives and financial transactions are companies within EDP Group. Financial instruments contracted outside EDP Group are generally engaged under ISDA Master Agreements and credit quality of external counterparties is analysed and collaterals required when needed. In the process of selling the energy (electricity, GCs and RECs produced), exposure arise from trade receivables, but also from mark-to-market of long term contracts: •  •  in the energy market of their respective countries (OMIE and MEFF in the case of the Spanish market). Credit risk from trade receivables is not significant due to the limited average collection period for customer balances and the quality of its debtors. Additional counter-party risk comes from the countries with renewables incentives, which it is usually treated as regulatory risk. market agents in the US. As it occurs in Europe, credit risk from trade receivables is not significant due to the limited mark-to-market of long term contracts may be significant. This exposure is managed by a detailed assessment of the counter-party before signing any long term agreement and by a requirement of collaterals when needed.  Regarding Trade receivables and Other debtors, net of the impairment losses recognised. The Group believes that the credit quality of these receivables is adequate and that no significant impaired credits exist that have not been recognised as such and provided for.  238  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  2   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  The maximum exposure to customer credit risk by counterparty type is detailed as follows: Thousand Euros  Dec 2016  Dec 2015  35,289 2,395 37,684  51,131 8,308 59,439  Corporate sectors and individuals Supply companies Business to business Business to consumers Other Total Corporate sectors and individuals Public sector  51,644  28,926  Total Public sector and Corporate sectors/individuals  89,328  88,365  Trade receivables by geographical market for the Group EDPR, is as follows: Thousand Euros Europe  Brazil  Dec 2016 Total  30,772 40,675 71,447  3,223 6,833 10,056  3,689 4,136 7,825  37,684 51,644 89,328  Europe  Corporate sectors and individuals Public sector Total  North America  North America  Brazil  Dec 2015 Total  Thousand Euros Corporate sectors and individuals Public sector Total  55,904 25,902 81,806  1,262 2,978 4,240  2,273 46 2,319  59,439 28,926 88,365  Regarding to past-due and not impaired Trade receivables, is analysed as follow: Thousand Euros  Dec 2016  Dec 2015  3,943 3,033  18,535 3,188  -  -1,342  82,352  67,984  89,328  88,365  Past due but not impaired trade receivables: Less than 3 months More than 3 months Impaired trade receivables Not past due and not impaired trade receivables Total  The age of trade receivables that are past due but not impaired may vary significantly depending on the type of customer (corporate sector and individuals or public sector). EDPR Group recognises impairment losses based on an economic case by case analysis, according with the characteristics of the customers. Liquidity risk  Liquidity risk is the possibility that the Group will not be able to meet its financial obligations as they fall due. The Group strategy to manage liquidity is to ensure, as far as possible, that it will always have significant liquidity to meet its liabilities when due, under both normal and stressed conditions, without incurring unacceptable losses or risking damage to the Group's reputation. The liquidity policy followed ensures compliance with payment obligations acquired, through maintaining sufficient credit facilities and having access to the EDP Group facilities. The EDP Renováveis Group undertakes management of liquidity risk through the engagement and maintenance of credit lines and financing facilities with its main shareholder, as well as directly in the market with national and international financial institutions, assuring the necessary funds to perform its activities.  Market price risk As at 31 December 2016, market price risk affecting the EDP Renováveis Group is not significant. In the case of EDPR NA, the great majority of the plants are under power purchase agreements, with fixed or escalating prices. In the case of EDPR EU, the electricity is sold in Spain, France, Italy and Portugal through regulated tariffs whether in Romania and Poland most plants sell their electricity and green certificates under power purchase agreements with fixed prices or floors. For the small share of energy sold with merchant exposure (electricity, green certificates and RECs generated, this market risk is managed through electricity sales swaps and REC swaps. EDPR EU and EDPR NA have electricity sales and REC swaps that qualify for hedge accounting (cash flow hedge) that are related to electricity sales for the years 2017 to 2020 (see note 35). The purpose of EDP Renováveis Group is to hedge a volume of energy generated to reduce its exposure to the energy price volatility.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  239 27   ENERGY ENERGY AS NEWART ENERGY AS THETHE NEWART AS THE NEWART  Capital management The Group’s goal in managing equity, in accordance with the policies established by its main shareholder, is to safeguard the Group’s capacity to continue operating as a going concern, grow steadily to meet established growth targets and maintain an optimum equity structure to reduce equity cost. In conformity with other sector groups, the Group controls its financing structure based on the leverage ratio. This ratio is calculated as net financial borrowings divided by total equity and net borrowings. Net financial borrowings are determined as the sum of financial debt, institutional equity liabilities corrected for non-current deferred revenues, less cash and cash equivalents.  05. Consolidation perimeter During the year ended in 31 December 2016, the changes in the consolidation perimeter of the EDP Renováveis Group were: Companies acquired: •  EDP Renewables Europe, S.L. acquired 15% of the share capital of the company EDP Renewables Romania, S.r.l.;  •  EDP Renovables España, S.L. acquired 15% of the share capital of the company Eólica La Brújula, S.A.;  •  Aprofitament D’Energies Renovables de la Terra Alta, S.A. (AERTA) acquired 23,6% of the interests that third parties had over itself as treasury shares, with a subsequent loss of 10,3% of indirect interests in the equity consolidated company Aprofitament D’Energies Renovables de L’Ebre, S.A. (AERE) after a corporate restructuring of the companies;  •  EDP Renewables, SGPS, S.A., acquired 100% of the share capital of the following companies: -  Parque Parque Parque Parque Parque  Eólico Eólico Eólico Eólico Eólico  da de do do do  Serra do Oeste, S.A. Torrinheiras, S.A. Planalto, S.A. Pinhal Oeste, S.A. Cabeço Norte, S.A.  This transaction has been considered, for consolidation purposes, as an asset acquisition out of the scope of IFRS 3 – Business Combinations, due to the nature of such transaction, the type of assets acquired and the initial stage of completion of the projects; •  EDP Renewables UK Ltd, acquired 33,36% of the share capital of the company Moray Offshore Renewables Ltd from Repsol Nuevas Energías S.A. (Repsol);  •  EDPR Renewables Polska, SP ZO.O acquired 35% of the share capital of the company Molen Wind II and 100% of the share capital of the companies Miramit Investments SP.Z O.O. and Tylion Investments S.A (which name changed to EDP Renewables Polska sp z o.o. ) ;  •  EDPR France Holding, S.A.S acquired 100% of the share capital of the company Parc Éolien Champagne Berrichonne, S.A.R.L.;  •  EDP Renováveis Brasil, S.A. acquired 100% of the share capital of the following companies: -  Central Central Central Central Central  Eólica Eólica Eólica Eólica Eólica  Babilônia Babilônia Babilônia Babilônia Babilônia  I S.A. II S.A. III S.A. IV S.A. V S.A.  This transaction has been considered, for consolidation purposes, as an asset acquisition out of the scope of IFRS 3 – Business Combinations, due to the nature of such transaction, the type of assets acquired and the initial stage of completion of the projects. •  EDP Renewables Italia, S.r.l. acquired 100% of the share capital of the company Parco Eólico Banzi S.r.l. This transaction has been considered, for consolidation purposes, within the scope of IFRS 3 – Business Combinations (see note 42).  240  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  28   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  •  EDP Renewables Italia Holding, S.r.l. acquired: (i) 100% of the share capital of the following companies: -  Conza Energía S.r.l.  -  VRG Wind 149, S.r.l.  -  VRG Wind 127, S.r.l.  -  T Power S.P.A.  -  Lucus Power S.r.l.  (ii) 75% of the share capital of the following companies: -  Tivano S.r.l.  -  San Mauro S.r.L  -  AW 2 S.r.l.  (iii) 51% of the share capital of the following company: -  Sarve S.r.l.  Non-controlling interests’ shareholders hold put options over the stake they own in the companies Tivano S.r.l., San Mauro S.r.L and AW 2 S.r.l. therefore they are 100% consolidated (see note 36). These transactions have been considered, for consolidation purposes, as an asset acquisition out of the scope of IFRS 3 – Business Combinations, due to the nature of such transaction, the type of assets acquired and the initial stage of completion of the projects; Total impact of the above acquisitions in Equity Holders of the Parent and in non-controlling interests represents a decrease amounting to 23,199 thousand Euros and 9,840 thousand Euros respectively.  Disposal of non-controlling interests: •  In the first quarter of 2016, EDP Renewables North America LLC. concluded the sale to Axium Nove Acquisition Co LLC, by 278,671 thousand Euros equivalent to 307,034 thousands of US Dollar (corresponding to a sale price of 307,500 thousands of US Dollar deducted from 466 thousands of US Dollar of transaction costs) of: (i) 49% of its interests in the following companies: - Waverly Wind Farm, LLC; - Arbuckle Mountain Wind Farm, LLC; - Rising Tree Wind Farm III, LLC; - 2015 Vento XIV, LLC; - 2015 Vento XIII, LLC; - EDPR Wind Ventures XIV, LLC; - EDPR Wind Ventures XIII, LLC (ii) 24% of its interests in the following companies: - Cloud County Wind Farm, LLC; - Pioneer Prairie Wind Farm I, LLC; - Arlington Wind Power Project LLC; - 2008 Vento III, LLC; - Horizon Wind Ventures IC, LLC This transaction was treated as a disposal of non-controlling interests without loss of control and therefore the positive difference between the book value and the fair value of the non-controlling interests sold, totaling a gain amounting to 23,460 thousand Euros, was booked against reserves under the corresponding accounting policy;  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  241 29   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  242  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  •  In the fourth quarter of 2016, EDP Renewables Polska sp z o.o. concluded the sale to ACE Poland S.À.R.L. (CTG Group) by 100,670 thousand Euros that equals to 226,349 thousand Euros deducted of loans totalling 124,778 thousand Euros and 901 thousand Euros of transaction costs, of 49% of its interests in the company EDP Renewables Polska Holdco S.A., with a subsequent loss of share interest in the following companies: - Relax Wind Park III, Sp. Z o.o. - Relax Wind Park I, Sp. Z o.o. - Elektrownia Wiatrowa Kresy I, Sp. Z o.o. - Molen Wind II, Sp. Z o.o. - Korsze Wind Farm, Sp. Z o.o. - Radziejów Wind Farm, Sp. Z o.o. This transaction was treated as a disposal of non-controlling interests without loss of control and therefore the positive difference between the book value and the fair value of the non-controlling interests sold, totaling a gain amounting to 14,783 thousand Euros, was booked against reserves under the corresponding accounting policy. Companies sold and liquidated  •  EDP Renewables UK Ltd. sold 49% of Inch Cape Offshore Ltd. for a total amount of 15,802 thousand Euros. The impact of this sale in the Profit and Loss of the consolidated financial statements amounts to a gain of 2,324 thousand Euros;  •  EDP Renewables Polska, SP ZO.O sold 60% in the Polish company J&Z Wind Farms, SP. Z o.o. for a total amount of 12,891 thousand Euros. The impact of this sale represents a decrease in non-controlling interests amounting to 4,344 thousand Euros and the impact in the Profit and Loss of the consolidated financial statements amounts to a gain of 6,958 thousand Euros (see note 8);  •  EDP Renewables South Africa Proprietary Ltd sold 43% in the South African company Modderfontein Wind Energy Project Proprietary Ltd with no significant impacts in the consolidated financial statements.  •  EDP Renovables España, S.L. liquidated Cultivos Energéticos de Castilla S.A.;  •  EDP Renewables Europe, S.L. liquidated EDPR RO Trading, S.r.l.;  •  EDP Renewables North America LLC liquidated Verde Wind Power LLC, Pioneer Prairie Wind Farm II LLC and Pioneer Prairie Interconnection LLC. Companies incorporated:  •  EDPR Participaciones S.L.U.;  •  Parc Éolien de Flavin S.A.S.;  •  Parc Éolien de Citernes S.A.S.;  •  Parc Éolien de Prouville S.A.S. ;  •  Parc Éolien de Louvières S.A.S. ;  •  Redbed Plains Wind Farm LLC.;  •  EDP Renewables Vento IV Holding LLC.;  •  Moray Offshore Renewable Power Limited;  •  Moray Offshore Windfarm (West) Limited;  •  2016 Vento XV LLC ;  •  2016 Vento XVI LLC;  •  EDPR Wind Venture XV LLC;  •  EDPR Wind Venture XVI LLC;  •  Headwaters Wind Farm II LLC*;  •  Moran Wind Farm LLC*;  •  Spruce Ridge Wind Farm LLC*;  •  Meadow Lake Wind Farm VI LLC*;  •  Meadow Lake Wind Farm VII LLC*;  •  Paulding Wind Farm V LLC*;  •  Waverly Wind Farm II LLC*;  •  Reloj del Sol Wind Farm LLC*;  •  Blue Marmot I LLC*;  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  243 31   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE THE NEWART ENERGY AS NEWART AS THE NEWART  • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  Blue Marmot II LLC*; LLC*; • Blue Marmot II Blue Marmot III LLC*; LLC*; • Blue Marmot III Blue Marmot IV LLC*; LLC*; • Blue Marmot IV Blue Marmot V LLC*; LLC*; • Blue Marmot V Blue Marmot VI LLC*; LLC*; • Blue Marmot VI Blue Marmot VII LLC*; LLC*; • Blue Marmot VII Blue Marmot VIII LLC*; LLC*; • Blue Marmot VIII Blue Marmot IX LLC*; LLC*; • Blue Marmot IX Blue Marmot X LLC*; LLC*; • Blue Marmot X Blue Marmot XI LLC*; LLC*; • Blue Marmot XI Horse Mountain Wind Farm LLC*; LLC*; • Horse Mountain Wind Farm Riverstart Solar Park LLC*; LLC*; • Riverstart Solar Park Riverstart Solar Park IIPark II LLC*; • Riverstart Solar LLC*; Hidalgo Wind Farm II LLC*; LLC*; • Hidalgo Wind Farm II  •  Big River Wind Power Power Project LLC*; • Big River Wind Project LLC*; RollingRolling UplandFarm LLC*; LLC*; Upland Wind Wind Farm •  •  Horizon Wind Freeport Windpower I LLC*. LLC*. • Horizon Wind Freeport Windpower I  •  * EDPR EDPR Group holds, through EDPR NA and EDPR Canada, of set of subsidiaries in the United States and Canada * Group holds, through EDPR NA and EDPR Canada, a set a subsidiaries in the United States and Canada legally established without share share capital and as at 31 at 31 December 2016, do not any assets, liabilities, legally established without capital and that, that, as December 2016, do not have have any assets, liabilities, or any operating activity or any operating activity Other Other changes: changes: •  •  •  EDPR Renewables Italia, S.r.l. increased its interests in the company Re Plus, S.r.l. until 100% 100% through a dilution of the • EDPR Renewables Italia, S.r.l. increased its interests in the company Re Plus, S.r.l. until through a dilution of the other shareholder of the company due to due to a capital reduction subsequent capitalcapital increase fully subscribed by EDPR. other shareholder of the company a capital reduction and a and a subsequent increase fully subscribed by EDPR. The impactimpact of this transaction represents a decrease in non-controlling interests and an increase in Equity Holders of the The of this transaction represents a decrease in non-controlling interests and an increase in Equity Holders of the Parent Parent amounting to 621 thousand respectively. amounting to 621 thousand Euros Euros respectively. EDPR International Investments B.V. (formerly TarcanTarcandiluteddiluted its interests equity equity consolidated company Eólica • EDPR International Investments B.V. (formerly B.V.) B.V.) its interests in the in the consolidated company Eólica de Coahuila, S.A. de C.V. toC.V. toof the share capitalcapital company due to due to a capital increase fully subscribed by the de Coahuila, S.A. de 51% 51% of the share of the of the company a capital increase fully subscribed by the company Energía Bal, S.A. de C.Vde C.V and by companies within within the Group.Group. The impact of this transaction in the company Energía Bal, S.A. and by other other companies the same same The impact of this transaction in the Consolidated Financial Statements is not significant. Consolidated Financial Statements is not significant. EDP Renewables România, S.r.l. has been merged into S.C. Ialomita Power Power S.r.l. • EDP Renewables România, S.r.l. has been merged into S.C. Ialomita S.r.l.  DuringDuring the year endedDecember 2015, the changes in the consolidation perimeter of the of the EDP Renováveis Group were: the year ended in 31 in 31 December 2015, the changes in the consolidation perimeter EDP Renováveis Group were: Companies acquired: Companies acquired: •  In • In September the ENEOPENEOP consortium members reached an agreement on the consortium's assets split had had September 2015, 2015, the consortium members reached an agreement on the consortium's assets split which which been created for a winda wind power contract launched by the Portuguese Government in 2005-2006. In the of this of this been created for power contract launched by the Portuguese Government in 2005-2006. In the terms terms agreement, EDPR Group Group began to hold the exclusive control of the following windfarm portfolio: agreement, EDPR began to hold the exclusive control of the following windfarm portfolio: Eólica do Alto da Lagoa,Lagoa, S.A. Eólica do Alto da S.A. Eólica das Serras Serras das Beiras, S.A. Eólica das das Beiras, S.A. Eólica do Cachopo, S.A. S.A. Eólica do Cachopo, Eólica do Castelo, S.A. S.A. Eólica do Castelo, Eólica da Coutada, S.A. S.A. Eólica da Coutada, Eólica do Espigão, S.A. S.A. Eólica do Espigão, Eólica da Lajeira, S.A. S.A. Eólica da Lajeira, Eólica do Alto do Mourisco, S.A. S.A. Eólica do Alto do Mourisco, Eólica dos Altos dos Salgueiros-Guilhado, S.A. S.A. Eólica dos Altos dos Salgueiros-Guilhado, Eólica do Alto da Teixosa, S.A. S.A. Eólica do Alto da Teixosa, Eólica da Terra do Mato, S.A. S.A. Eólica da Terra do Mato, Eólica do Velão, Velão, S.A. Eólica do S.A.  244  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  32  32   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  This transaction was treated as a business combination achieved in stages and generated a provisional gain on the revaluation of the previously held investment in the amount of 124,750 thousand Euros, which is recognized under Other income (see note 43 and 8). •  EDP Renovables España, S.L. acquired 2% of the share capital of Acampo Arias, S.L., 24% of the share capital of Compañía Eólica, Campo de Borja, S.A., 5% of the share capital of D.E. Rabosera, S.A., 20% of the share capital of Molino de Caragüeyes, S.L., 5% of the share capital of Parque Eólico La Sotonera, S.L., 16% of the share capital of Eólica Alfoz, S.L., 40 % of the share capital of Investigación y Desarrollo de Energías Renovables, S.L., 40% of the share capital of Parques de Generación Eólica, S.L., 32 % of the share capital of Parque Eólico Altos del Voltoya, S.A. and 40% of the share capital of Desarrollos Catalanes Del Viento, S.L. with the subsequent gain of 100% of share interest in: Aprofitament D'Energies Renovables de L'Ebre, S.A., Aprofitament D'Energies Renovables de la Terra Alta, S.A., Parc Eòlic de Coll de Moro, S.L., Parc Eòlic de Torre Madrina, S.L. and Parc Eòlic de Vilalba dels Arcs, S.L.;  •  EDP Renováveis, S.A. agreed to acquire 45% of share capital of EDP Renováveis Brasil, S.A. to EDP Energias do Brasil S.A. Subsequently to this agreement, EDP Renováveis Brasil, S.A performed a capital increase exclusively subscribed by EDP Renováveis, S.A., diluting the participation of EDP Energias do Brasil S.A. from 45% to 29%.  •  EDPR Yield, S.A.U. acquired 100% of the share capital of EDPR Yield Spain Services, S.L.U.  •  EDP Renováveis Brasil, S.A. acquired 100% of the share capital of Central Eólica Aventura II, S.A.;  •  EDP Renewables, SGPS, S.A. acquired 19.40% of the share capital of WindPlus, S.A. and 100% of the share capital of Stirlingpower, Unipessoal Lda.  •  EDP Renewables Polska, Sp. z o.o. acquired 100% of the share capital of Brent Investments, S.A.  Total impact of the above acquisitions in Equity Holders of the Parent and in non-controlling interests amounts to 30,960 thousand Euros and -97,321 thousand Euros respectively. Disposal of non-controlling interests: •  EDP Renovables España, S.L. sold 6% of its interests in Iberia Aprovechamientos Eólicos, S.A.U. by 18 thousand Euros;  •  In the second quarter of 2015, EDP Renewables North America LLC. concluded the sale to Fiera Axium LLC, by 292,558 thousand Euros that equals 324,716 thousands of US Dollar (corresponding to a sale price of 348,000 thousands of US Dollar deducted of 6,009 thousands of US Dollar of transaction costs and 17,275 thousands of US Dollar of capital distributions): (i) 49% of its interests in the following companies: - Blue Canyon Windpower V, LLC; - Paulding Wind Farm II LLC; - Headwaters Wind Farm LLC; - Rising Tree Wind Farm LLC; - Rising Tree Wind Farm II; - 2009 Vento V, LLC; - 2011 Vento IX, LLC; - 2014 Vento XI, LLC; - 2014 Vento XII, LLC; - Horizon Wind Ventures III, LLC; - Horizon Wind Ventures IX, LLC; - EDPR Wind Ventures XI, LLC; - EDPR Wind Ventures XII, LLC.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  245 33  245   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE THE NEWART ENERGY AS NEWART AS THE NEWART  (ii) 25% of its interests in the following companies: - Cloud County Wind Farm, LLC; - Pioneer Prairie Wind Farm I, LLC; - Arlington Wind Power Project LLC; - 2008 Vento III, LLC; - Horizon Wind Ventures IC, LLC  This transaction was treated as a disposal of non-controlling interests without loss of control and therefore the negative difference between the book value and the fair value of the non-controlling interests sold, totalling 19,096 thousand Euros, was booked against reserves under the corresponding accounting policy. •  In the second quarter of 2015, EDP Renewables North America LLC. sold to DIF Infra 3 US LLC 49% of its interests, by 25,281 thousand Euros that equals to 28,060 thousands of US Dollar (corresponding to a sale price of 30,000 thousands of US Dollar deducted of 1,940 thousands of US Dollar of transaction costs), in the following companies: - EDPR Solar Ventures I; - 2014 Sol I, LLC; - Lone Valley Solar Park I LLC; - Lone Valley Solar Park II LLC  This transaction was treated as a disposal of non-controlling interests without loss of control and therefore the negative difference between the book value and the fair value of the non-controlling interests sold, totalling 427 thousand Euros, was booked against reserves under the corresponding accounting policy. •  In the second quarter of 2015, EDP Renováveis Brasil, S.A. sold to Cwei Brasil Participações Lda (CWEI Brasil) 49% of its interests in a set of wind farm assets, by 66,962 thousand Euros that equals to 247,664 thousands of Brazilian Real (corresponding to a sale price of 249,613 thousands of Brazilian Real deducted of 1,949 thousands of Brazilian Real of transation fees), in the following companies: - Central Eólica Aventura I, S.A.; - Central Nacional de Energia Eólica, S.A.; - Elebras Projetos Ltda; - Central Eólica Feijao I, S.A.; - Central Eólica Feijao II, S.A.; - Central Eólica Feijao III, S.A.; - Central Eólica Feijao IV, S.A.; - Central Eólica Jau, S.A  This transaction was treated as a disposal of non-controlling interests without loss of control and therefore the positive difference between the book value and the fair value of the non-controlling interests sold, totalling 14,800 thousand Euros, was booked against reserves under the corresponding accounting policy. Companies liquidated: •  EDPR Renovables España, S.L. liquidated Tratamientos Medioambientales del Norte, S.A. and Industrias Medioambientales Río Carrión, S.A;  246  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  34   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUALEDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  Companies incorporated: •  Vientos de Coahuila, S.A. de C.V.;  •  TACA Wind, S.r.l.;  •  EDPR Yield France Services, S.A.S;  •  EDPR Yield Portugal Services, Unip. Lda.  •  EDPR PT - Parques Eólicos, S.A.  •  EDPR Servicios de Mexico, S. de R.L. de C.V.;  •  2015 Vento XIII, LLC;  •  2015 Vento XIV, LLC *;  •  EDPR Wind Ventures XIII, LLC;  •  EDPR Wind Ventures XIV, LLC;  •  EDPR Vento I Holding, LLC;  •  EDPR WF, LLC  •  Nation Rise Wind Farm GP Inc.*;  •  Nation Rise Wind Farm LP;  •  South Branch Wind Farm II GP Inc.*;  •  South Branch Wind Farm II LP *;  •  EDP Renewables Sharp Hills Project LP;  * EDP Renováveis holds, through its subsidiaries EDPR NA and EDPR Canada, a set of subsidiaries in the United States and Canada legally established without share capital and that, as at 31 December 2015, do not have any assets, liabilities, or any operating activity. The companies included in the consolidation perimeter of EDPR Group as at 31 December 2016 and 2015 are listed in Annex I.  06. Revenues Revenues are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  908,819 507,607 34,424 1,450,850 1,897 1,452,747  826,699 498,018 21,379 1,346,096 315 1,346,411  1,745  3,421  -6,341 5,063 -1,278 1,453,214  Revenues by business and geography Electricity in Europe Electricity in North America Electricity in Brazil  2,881 -3,108 -227 1,349,605  Other revenues Services rendered Changes in inventories and cost of raw material and consumables used Cost of consumables used Changes in inventories Total Revenues  The breakdown of revenues by segment is presented in the segmental reporting (see note 43).  07. Income from institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms Income from institutional partnership in U.S. Wind Farms in the amount of 197,544 thousand Euros (31 December 2015: 197,442 thousand Euros), includes revenue recognition related to production tax credits (PTC), investments tax credits (ITC) and other tax benefits, mostly from accelerated tax depreciation related to projects Sol I, Blue Canyon I and Vento I to XVI, (see note 31).  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  247 35  247   ENERGY AS THE NEWART ENERGY AS THE NEWART  08. Other income Other income is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  Gains related with business combinations Amortisation of deferred income related to power purchase agreements Contract and insurance compensations Other income  31 Dec 2015  3,890 4,915  124,750 9,961  19,740 25,207 53,752  11,905 14,944 161,560  Gains related with business combinations mainly include the profit resulting from the acquisition of the Italian company Parco incorporation of ENEOP wind farms portfolio. The power purchase agreements between EDPR NA and its customers were valued based on market assumptions, at the acquisition date of the business combination, using discounted cash flow models. At that date, these agreements were valued at approximately 190,400 thousands of USD and booked as a non-current liability (see note 32). This liability is amortised over the period of the agreements against Other income. As at 31 December 2016, the amortisation for the period amounts to 4,915 thousand Euros (31 December 2015: 9,961 thousand Euros). Euros (see note 5 and 25).  09. Supplies and services This caption is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  14,808 9,331 11,217 36,835 304,740  19,612 7,292 12,248 37,098 292,728  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  723 72,571 11,893 15,974 1,706 -18,963 83,904  Rents and leases Maintenance and repairs Specialised works: - IT Services, legal and advisory fees - Shared services - Other services Other supplies and services  689 66,641 10,979 15,336 2,045 -20,770 74,920  3,676 6,314 9,990 93,894  3,301 4,560 1,487 9,348 84,268  54,819 177,730  47,021 169,457  10. Personnel costs and employee benefits Personnel costs and employee benefits is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros Personnel costs Board remuneration Remunerations Social charges on remunerations able remuneration Other costs Own work capitalised  Employee benefits Costs with pension plans Costs with medical care plans and other benefits Other  As at 31 December 2016 and at 31 December 2015, costs with pension plans relates to defined contribution plans (3,628 thousand Euros and 3,284 thousand Euros respectively) and defined benefit plans (48 thousands of Euros and 17 thousand Euros respectively). The average breakdown by management positions and professional category of the permanent staff as of 31 December 2016 and 2015 is as follows: 31 Dec 2016 Board members Senior man Middle management -skilled and skilled employees Other employees  248  31 Dec 2015  17 17  17 17  89 591 278 97 1,055 1,072  81 561 260 75 977 994  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  3   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  11. Other expenses Other expenses are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  Taxes Losses on fixed assets Other costs and losses  77,382 5,696 51,847 134,925  31 Dec 2015  79,207 72,248 37,861 189,316  The caption Taxes, on 31 December 2016, includes the amount of 26,020 thousand Euros (31 December 2015: 28,365 thousand Euros) related to taxes for energy generators in Spain, affecting all the wind farms in operation, amounting to 7% of revenues for each wind farm. In 2016, the EDPR Group proceeded to the write-off assets under construction, which referes to (i) 825 thousands of Euros related to the abandonment of ongoing projects in EDPR North America (41,423 thousands of Euros in 2015), which were considered to be economically unviable under current market conditions; (ii) 2,368 thousands of Euros related to the abandonment of ongoing projects in EDPR Europe, following the reduced probability of their future development (20,638 thousands of Euros in 2015); and (iii) 2,236 thousands of Euros, due to incremental costs related with the damage in the met mast of the offshore wind park Moray Offshore Renewables Limited, a EDPR UK Limited subsidiary (5,395 thousands of Euros in 2015) (see note 15).  12. Amortisation and impairment This caption is analysed as follows:  Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  727 608,581 8,638 3,387 621,333  795 551,560 11,136 21,542 585,033  3,162 3,162  2,263 2,263  624,495  Property, plant and equipment Buildings and other constructions Plant and machinery Other Impairment loss  170 587,466  -22,208 602,287  -22,837 564,629  Intangible assets Industrial property, other rights and other intangibles Impairment loss Impairment of goodwill Amortisation of deferred income (Government grants)  There are no significant impairments in 2016. In 2015, the EDPR Group booked an impairment loss in Property, plant and equipment of 26,491 thousand Euros as a result of the recoverability assessment of wind farms and deferred green certificates in Romania (see note 15 and 16).  13. Financial income and financial expenses Financial income and financial expenses are analysed as follows:  Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  475 20,154 13,946 106 61,476  189,499  Net financial income / (expenses)  26,795  110 30,729 12,941 2,563 54,242  Financial expenses Interest expense Derivative financial instruments: Interest Fair value Foreign exchange losses Own work capitalised Unwinding Other financial expenses  31 Dec 2015  7,899  Financial income Interest income Derivative financial instruments: Interest Fair value Foreign exchange gains Other financial income  194,277  56,067 31,702 13,745 -23,013 95,433 40,902 404,335 -350,093  42,965 17,716 14,150 -22,986 83,421 17,416 346,959 -285,483  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  37 249 249   ENERGY AS THE NEWART ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Derivative financial instruments include interest liquidations on the derivative financial instrument established between EDP Renováveis and EDP Branch (see notes 35 and 37). In accordance with the accounting policy described on note 2 g), the borrowing costs (interest) capitalised in tangible fixed assets in progress as at 31 December 2016 amounted to 23,013 thousand Euros (at 31 December 2015 amounted to 22,986 thousand Euros) (see note 15), and are included under Own work capitalised (financial interest). The interest rates used for this capitalisation vary in accordance with the related loans, between 0.42% and 9.75% (31 December 2015: 0.57% and 14.14 %). Interest expense refers to interest on loans bearing interest at contracted and market rates. Unwinding expenses refers essentially to the financial update of provisions for dismantling and decommissioning of wind farms of 4,610 thousand Euros (31 December 2015: 4,006 thousand Euros) (see note 30) and the implied return in institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms of 90,337 thousand Euros (31 December 2015: 78,953 thousand Euros) (see note 31).  14. Income tax expense Main features of the tax systems of the countries in which the EDP Renewables Group operates The statutory corporate income tax rates applicable in the countries in which EDP Renewables Group operates are as follows: Country  Europe: Belgium France Italy Poland Portugal Romania Spain United Kingdom America: Brazil Canada Mexico United States of America  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  33.99% 33.33% - 34.43% 27.5% - 32.3% 19% 21% - 29.5% 16% 25% 20%  33.99% 33.33% - 34.43% 27.5% - 32.3% 19% 21% - 29.5% 16% 28% 20% - 21%  34% 26.50% 30% 38.2%  34% 26.50% 30% 38.2%  EDP Renováveis S.A. and its subsidiaries file individual tax returns in accordance with the applicable tax legislation. Nevertheless, the company and the majority of its Spanish subsidiaries in Spain are taxed under the tax consolidation group regime applicable according to the Spanish law. EDP - Energias de Portugal, S.A. - Sucursal en España (Branch) is the dominant company of this Group which includes other subsidiaries that are not within the renewables energy industry. As per the applicable tax legislation, tax periods may be subject to examination by the various Tax Administrations during a limited number of years. Statutes of limitation differ from country to country, as follows: USA, Belgium and France: 3 years; Spain, United Kingdom, Italy and Portugal: 4 years or, in the case of Portugal, if tax losses/credits have been used, the number of years that such tax losses/credits may be carry forward; Brazil, Romania, Poland, Italy and Mexico: 5 years; and Canada: 10 years. Tax losses generated in each year are also subject to Tax Administrations’ review and reassessment. Losses may be used to offset yearly taxable income assessed in the subsequent periods, as follows: 5 years in Poland; 7 in Romania; 10 in Mexico; 12 in Portugal (which is reduced to 5 years from 2017 onwards); 20 in the USA and Canada; and indefinitely in Spain, France, Italy, Belgium, Brazil and the United Kingdom. Moreover, in the United Kingdom and France tax losses in a given year may be carried back against the taxable base assessed in the previous tax year and in the USA and Canada in the 2 and 3 previous years, respectively. However, the deduction of tax losses in Portugal, Spain, Brazil, France, Italy and Poland may be limited to a percentage of the taxable income of each period. EDP Renewables Group companies may, in accordance with the law, benefit from certain tax benefits or incentives in specific conditions, namely the Production Tax Credits in the US which are the dominant form of wind remuneration in that country, and represent an extra source of revenue per unit of electricity ($23/MWh in 2016 and 2015), over the first 10 years of the asset’s life. EDP Renewables Group transfer pricing policy follows the rules, guidelines and best international practices applicable across all geographies where the Group operates, in due compliance with the spirit and letter of the Law.  250  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  38   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT 2016 ANNUALEDPREDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  Changes in thein the tax lawrelevance to theto theRenewables Group in 2016 2016 Changes tax law with with relevance EDP EDP Renewables Group in Corporate income tax (“CIT”) rate rate Corporate income tax (“CIT”) -  The statutory CIT rate applicable in Spain (in particular, in the in the so called “Common Territory”) was reduced28% to The statutory CIT rate applicable in Spain (in particular, so called “Common Territory”) was reduced from from 28% to 25%, with effect from 1from 1 January onwards, according to Lawto Law 27/2014, November 2014. 2014. 25%, with effect January 2016 2016 onwards, according 27/2014, of 27 of 27 November  -  In 2016 the statutory CIT rates (IRES)(IRES) applicable in in Italy, FranceFrance and the United Kingdomreduced as In 2016 the statutory CIT rates applicable in 2017 2017 in Italy, and the United Kingdom were were reduced as follows: follows: • In Italy, from 27.5%27.5% to effective from 1from 1 January onwards, as per as per the Budget Law; Law; • In Italy, from to 24%, 24%, effective January 2017 2017 onwards, the 2016 2016 Budget • In France, the Government announced in 2016 that the CIT rate would would be progressively lowered from 33.33% • In France, the Government announced in 2016 that the CIT rate be progressively lowered down down from 33.33% to 28% for all for all companies before 2020, starting in with small and medium-sized enterprises and expanding to to 28% companies before 2020, starting in 2017 2017 with small and medium-sized enterprises and expanding to larger larger companies as a second step; companies as a second step; • In the In the United Kingdom, at Summer Budget the government announced legislation setting the CIT main rate rate • United Kingdom, at Summer Budget 2015 2015 the government announced legislation setting the CIT main (for all(for all profits except ring profits) at 19% for thefor the starting 1 April12017 and atand atfor thefor the starting profits except ring fence fence profits) at 19% years years starting April 2017 18% 18% years years starting 1 April12020. 2020. At Budget 2016, the government announced a further reduction tofor thefor the year starting 1 April April At Budget 2016, the government announced a further reduction to 17% 17% year starting 1 April 2020. 2020.  Tax losses losses carried forward Tax carried forward -  In Spain,Spain, the Decree-Law 3/2016, of 2 December 2016, 2016, introduced restrictions on the utilization of carried In the Royal Royal Decree-Law 3/2016, of 2 December introduced restrictions on the utilization of carried forward tax losses losses affecting companies with a turnover or higherhigher20,000 thousand Euros in the in the 12 months forward tax affecting companies with a turnover equal equal or than than 20,000 thousand Euros 12 months prior to the to the beginning of the relevant year, as follows: prior beginning of the relevant fiscal fiscal year, as follows: • Companies with turnover from 20,000 thousand Euros and lower than 60,000 thousand Euros:Euros: carried forward tax • Companies with turnover from 20,000 thousand Euros and lower than 60,000 thousand carried forward tax losses losses utilization is limited toof the of the tax base; utilization is limited to 50% 50% tax base; • Companies with turnover equal or higherhigher60,000 thousand Euros:Euros: carried forward tax losses utilization is • Companies with turnover equal or than than 60,000 thousand carried forward tax losses utilization is limitedlimited toof the of the tax base. to 25% 25% tax base.  -  In Portugal, the Budget Law for 2016 (Law 7-A/2016, of 30 March March 2016) has reduced the tax losses carry-forward In Portugal, the Budget Law for 2016 (Law 7-A/2016, of 30 2016) has reduced the tax losses carry-forward periodperiod12 to 5 years, years, for tax losses assessed in tax beginning on or after 1after 1 January 2017. from from 12 to 5 for tax losses assessed in tax years years beginning on or January 2017.  Corporate income tax provision Corporate income tax provision This caption is analysed as follows: This caption is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros Euros Thousand  31 DecDec 2016 31 2016  CurrentCurrent tax tax Deferred tax Deferred tax Income tax expense Income tax expense  -49,928 -49,928 12,359 12,359 -37,569 -37,569  31 DecDec 2015 31 2015  -51,423 -51,423 6,076 6,076 -45,347 -45,347  The effective income tax rate as at 31 December 2016 and 2015 is analysed as follows: The effective income tax rate as at 31 December 2016 and 2015 is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros Euros Thousand  31 Dec 2016 2016 31 Dec  Profit before tax Profit before tax Income Income tax expense tax expense Effective Income Income Tax Rate Effective Tax Rate  213,681 213,681 -37,569-37,569 17.58%17.58%  31 Dec 2015 2015 31 Dec  290,838 290,838 -45,347-45,347 15.59%15.59%  The difference between the theoretical and the efective income tax expense, resultsresultsthe application of the of the law provisions in The difference between the theoretical and the efective income tax expense, from from the application law provisions in the determination of the of the tax as demonstrated below.below. the determination tax base, base, as demonstrated The reconciliation between the nominal and the effective income tax rate for thefor the Group during the ended ended 31 December The reconciliation between the nominal and the effective income tax rate Group during the years years 31 December 2016 and 2015 is analysed as follows: 2016 and 2015 is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros Euros Thousand  Profit before taxes taxes Profit before Nominal income income tax rate (*) Nominal tax rate (*) Theoretical income income tax expense Theoretical tax expense  31 Dec 2016 2016 31 Dec  31 Dec 2015 2015 31 Dec  9,241 9,241 7,434 7,434 2,453 2,453 -2,406 -2,406 -18,963-18,963 4,559 4,559 13,533 13,533 -37,569 -37,569  -3,207 -3,207 -2,887 -2,887 1,884 1,884 35,294 35,294 -14,957-14,957 6,799 6,799 13,162 13,162 36,08836,088  Fiscal revaluations, amortization, depreciation and provisions Fiscal revaluations, amortization, depreciation and provisions Tax losses and taxand tax credits Tax losses credits Financial investments in associates Financial investments in associates Difference between gains and accounting gains and losses losses Difference between gains and accounting gains and Effect of tax rates inrates in foreign jurisdictions Effect of tax foreign jurisdictions Tax benefitsbenefits Tax Other Other Efective income tax expense as per as per the Consolidated Income Statement Efective income tax expense the Consolidated Income Statement (*) Statutory corporate income income tax rate applicable in Spain (*) Statutory corporate tax rate applicable in Spain  213,681 213,681 25.00%25,00% -53,420-53,420  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  290,838 290,838 28.00%28,00% -81,435-81,435  251 39  251  39   ENERGY ENERGY ENERGY AS THETHE NEWART AS NEWART AS THE NEWART  The caption Fiscal revaluations, amortization, depreciation and provisions includes essentially the net effect of the fiscal revaluation of certain eligible EDPR assets held in Portugal, in accordance with the Decree-Law 66/2016 of 3 November, which led to an increase of those assets’ tax base of 70,477 thousand Euros. As a consequence, the EDPR Group recognised deferred tax assets of 19,481 thousand Euros that will be recovered through the tax deduction of the underlying revalued assets, to be current income tax in the total amount of 9,677 thousand Euros. Consequently, the net effect of this revaluation in the net income for the period is of approximately 9,808 thousand Euros.  15. Property, plant and equipment This caption is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  15,235,392 6,695 100,754 1,243,106 16,635,732  -617,946 -4,012,314 -3,387 -91,286 -4,724,933 13,437,427  Carrying amount  31,135 18,650  17,073,075 6,700 112,969 917,652 18,162,360  Accumulated depreciation and impairment losses Depreciation charge Accumulated depreciation in previous years Impairment losses Impairment losses in previous years  31 Dec 2015  31,519 20,445  Cost Land and natural resources Buildings and other constructions Plant and machinery: - Renewables generation - Other plant and machinery Other Assets under construction  -563,491 -3,368,734 -21,542 -69,513 -4,023,280 12,612,452  The movement in Property, plant and equipment during 2016, is analysed as follows: Thousands of Euros  Thousands of Euros Accumulated depreciation and impairment losses Buildings and other constructions Plant and machinery Other  Additions  Disposals/ Write-offs  Transfers  Exchange Differences  Changes in perimeter / other  Balance At 31 Dec  31,135  563  -583  -  404  -  31,519  18,650  1,090  -  27  678  -  20,445  15,242,087  174,107  -4,263  1,310,300  318,923  38,621  17,079,775  100,754 1,243,106  8,891 978,323  -334 -4,773  1,813 -1,312,140  1,845 14,687  -1,551  112,969 917,652  16,635,732  Cost Land and natural resources Buildings and other constructions Plant and machinery Other Assets under construction  Balance at 01 jan  1,162,974  -9,953  -  336,537  37,070  18,162,360  Balance at 01 jan  Charge for the period  Impairme nt losses/ reverses  Disposals/ write-offs  Transfers  Exchange Differences  Changes in perimeter / other  Balance at 31 Dec  11,156  727  -  -  -  329  -  12,212  3,938,575  608,581  3,387  -1,837  -  78,565  2,035  4,629,306  73,549 4,023,280  8,638 617,946  3,387  -237 -2,074  -  1,541 80,435  -76 1,959  83,415 4,724,933  As explained in note 3, Management has taken the decision to extend the useful life of the renewables assets from 25 to 30 years at the end of December 2016. Since this decision has taken place at the end of the year 2016, it has no significant impacts in the current year’s amortization of renewables assets. Plant and machinery includes the cost of the wind farms under operation.  252  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  4   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  Additions include the allocation of the acquisition cost of the following companies due to the nature of such transaction, the type of assets acquired and the initial stage of completion of the projects (see note 5): -  Italian companies Conza Energía, Sarve, VRG Wind 149, VRG Wind 127, T Power S.P.A, Tivano, San Mauro, AW 2 and Lucus Power amounting to 11,292 thousand Euros; Portuguese companies Serra do Oeste, Torrinheiras, Planalto, Pinhal Oeste and Cabeço Norte amounting to 8,963 thousand Euros; Brazilian companies Babilônia I, Babilônia II, Babilônia III, Babilônia IV and Babilônia V amounting to 8,292 thousand Euros; French company Champagne Berrichone amounting to 1,012 thousand Euros;  Transfers from assets under construction into operation, refer mainly to wind farms of the EDP Renováveis Group that become operational in the United States of America, Brazil, Poland, and France. Disposals/Write-offs includes 3,193 thousand Euros related to the abandonment of ongoing projects mainly in Poland and in the United States of America and an additional write-off of 2,236 thousand Euros due to the damage that took place in the previous year in the met mast of the offshore wind farm of Moray (see note 11). The caption Changes in perimeter/Other mainly includes the impact of the consolidation of the new Italian wind farm Banzi in EDPR Group in result of 38,767 thousand Euros (see note 42). The Company has taken out an insurance global program to cover risks relating to property, plant and equipment. The coverage provided by these policies is considered to be sufficient. Loans with credit institutions formalized as ‘Project Finances’ are secured by the shares of the corresponding wind farms and, ultimately, by the fixed assets of the wind farm to which the financing is related (see note 29). Additionally, the construction of certain assets have been partly financed by grants received from different Government Institutions. The movement in Property, plant and equipment during 2015, is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros Cost Land and natural resources Buildings and other constructions Plant and machinery Other Assets under construction  Thousand Euros Accumulated depreciation and impairment losses Buildings and other constructions Plant and machinery Other  Balance at 01 jan  Additions  Disposals/ Write-offs  Transfers  Exchange Differences  Changes in perimeter / other  Balance At 31 Dec  32,977  447  -3,493  74  1,077  53  31,135  17,257  802  -60  -  651  -  18,650  12,760,510 88,046 1,259,732  441,100 5,554 703,279  -4,026 -51 -72,795  619,659 2,441 -692,064  693,611 4,764 45,763  731,233 -809  15,242,087 100,754 1,243,106  14,158,522  1,151,182  -80,425  -69,890  745,866  730,477  16,635,732  Balance at 01 jan  Charge for the period  Impairmen t losses/ reverses  Disposals/ write-offs  Transfers  Exchange Difference s  Changes in perimeter / other  Balance at 31 Dec  9,755  795  -  -60  -  666  -  11,156  3,076,925 58,866 3,145,546  551,560 11,136 563,491  21,542 21,542  -1,737 -48 -1,845  -6,780 -3 -6,783  158,861 3,598 163,125  138,204 138,204  3,938,575 73,549 4,023,280  Plant and machinery includes the cost of the wind farms and solar plants under operation. Transfers from assets under construction into operation, refer mainly to wind and solar farms of the EDP Renováveis Group that become operational in Poland, Italy, France, United States of America, Spain and Romania. Additionally, the caption Transfers also contains the reclassification of the assets of the Polish wind farm J&Z to assets held for sale (see note 25) amounting to 63,151 thousand Euros. Impairment losses are related to wind farms in Romania. Impairment reverses are related to a wind farm in France (see note 12). Disposals/Write-offs includes 68,134 thousand Euros mainly disaggregated with: (i) 41,423 thousand Euros related to the abandonment of ongoing projects in EDPR North America; (ii) 20,638 thousand Euros related to the abandonment of ongoing projects in EDPR Europe; and (iii) 5,395 thousand Euros, due to damage in the met mast of the offshore wind park of Moray (see note 11).  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  253 41  253   ENERGY AS THE NEWART ENERGY AS THE NEWART  The caption Changes in perimeter/Other includes the impact of the consolidation of new wind farms in EDPR Group in result of ENEOP consortium's deal with an impact of 594,492 thousand Euros. Additionally, the effect of the revaluation of these assets of ENEOP amounting to 249,671 thousand Euros is included in the caption Additions (see note 42). Assets under construction as at 31 December 2016 and 2015 are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  EDPR EU Group EDPR NA Group Other  31 Dec 2015  331,216 537,540 48,896 917,652  439,333 698,693 105,080 1,243,106  Assets under construction as at 31 December 2016 and 2015 are essentially related to wind farms under construction and development in EDPR Europe and EDPR North America. Financial interests capitalised amount to 23,013 thousand Euros as at 31 December 2016 (31 December 2015: 22,986 thousand Euros) (see note 13). Personnel costs capitalised amount to 18,963 thousand Euros as at 31 December 2016 (31 December 2015: 20,770 thousand Euros) (see note 10). The EDP Renováveis Group has lease and purchase obligations disclosed in Note 36 - Commitments.  16. Intangible assets This caption is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  221,995 34,638 256,633  190,068 24,785 214,853  -3,162 -43,282 -46,444 210,189  Cost Industrial property, other rights and other intangible assets Intangible assets under development  -2,263 -40,462 -42,725 172,128  Accumulated amortisation Amortisation charge Accumulated amortisation in previous years Impairment losses Carrying amount  Industrial property, other rights and other intangible assets mainly include: -  -  Wind generation licenses amounting to 114,803 thousand Euros in the EDPR NA Group (31 December 2015: 100,987 thousand Euros) and in Portuguese companies amounting to 30,205 thousand Euros (the same amount as at 31 December 2015); and Deferred green certificates in Romania amounting to 73,123 thousand Euros (31 December 2015: 55,990 thousand Euros) (see note 2 i)).  The movement in Intangible assets during 2016, is analysed as follows: Balance at 01 Jan Cost Industrial property, other rights and other intangible assets Intangible assets under development  254  254  Additions  Disposals / write-offs  Transfers  Exchange differences  Changes in the perimeter / other  Balance at 31 Dec  190,068  20,102  -19  -  3,696  8,148  221,995  24,785  13,735  -  -  455  -4,337  34,638  214,853  33,837  -19  -  4,151  3,811  256,633  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  42   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  Balance at 01 Jan  Accumulated amortisation Industrial property, other rights and other intangible assets  Charge for the year  Impairment  Disposals /write-offs  Changes in perimeter / other  Exchange differences  Balance at 31 Dec  42,725  3,162  -  -  557  -  46,444  42,725  3,162  -  -  557  -  46,444  Additions include the recognition of deferred green certificates rights in Romania in the amount of 17,504 thousand Euros and the impact of the consolidation of new wind farms in the EDPR Group related to the acquisition of the Portuguese companies Serra do Oeste, Torrinheiras, Planalto, Pinhal Oeste and Cabeço Norte in the amount of 6,781 thousand Euros (Refer to note 5). The movement in Intangible assets during 2015, is analysed as follows:  Transfers  Exchange differences  Changes in the perimeter / other  Balance at 31 Dec  -  456  9,598  16,100  190,068  5,910  -  -498  -864  11,615  24,785  154,104  24,342  -  -42  8,734  27,715  214,853  Balance at 01 Jan  Charge for the year  Impairment  Disposals /writeoffs  Exchange differences  Changes in perimeter / other  Balance at 31 Dec  36,400 36,400  2,263 2,263  -  -  1,063 1,063  2,999 2,999  42,725 42,725  Balance at 01 Jan 145,482  Accumulated amortisation Industrial property, other rights and other intangible assets  18,432  8,622  Cost Industrial property, other rights and other intangible assets Intangible assets under development  Additions  Disposals / write-offs  Additions included the recognition of deferred green certificates rights in Romania in the amount of 19,239 thousand Euros. The caption Changes in perimeter/Other included the impact of the consolidation of new wind farms in EDPR Group in result of ENEOP consortium's deal with an impact of 22,436 thousand Euros (see note 43) .  17. Goodwill For the Group, the breakdown of Goodwill resulting from the difference between the cost of the investments and the corresponding share of the fair value of the net assets acquired, is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  636,153 490,385 61,460 43,712 40,596 748,187 1,153 1,385,493  636,288 490,385 61,460 43,712 40,731 724,813 916 1,362,017  Goodwill booked in EDPR EU Group: - EDPR Spain Group - EDPR France Group - EDPR Portugal Group - Other Goodwill booked in EDPR NA Group Other  The movements in Goodwill, by subgroup, during 2016 are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros EDPR EU Group: - EDPR Spain Group - EDPR France Group - EDPR Portugal Group - Other EDPR NA Group Other  Balance at 01 Jan  Increases  Decreases  ImpairMent  Exchange Differences  Changes in Perimeter / other  Balance at 31 Dec  490,385 61,460 43,712 40,731 724,813 916 1,362,017  131 131  -  -  -266 23,374 237 23,345  -  490,385 61,460 43,712 40,596 748,187 1,153 1,385,493  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  255 43   ENERGY ENERGY ENERGY AS NEWART AS THETHE NEWART AS THE NEWART  The movements in Goodwill, by subgroup, during 2015 are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros - EDPR Spain Group - EDPR France Group - EDPR Portugal Group - Other EDPR NA Group Other  Balance at 01 Jan  Increases  Decreases  492,385 61,460 42,915 38,351 651,264 1,341  797 2,499 51  -2,000 2,000  ImpairMent  Exchange Differences  Changes in Perimeter / other  Balance at 31 Dec  -170  -119 73,549 -306  -  490,385 61,460 43,712 40,731 724,813 916  mainly presents a decrease in goodwill movement in the amount of 2,000 thousand Euros and an increase in the amount of 2,499 thousand Euros that are principally related to the contingent price revision related to the purchase agreements of three projects in EDPR Spain and several projects in EDPR Poland, respectively. These contracts were signed before 1 January 2010, date of the adoption of the revised IFRS 3, therefore have been accounted for as described in the accounting policy 2 b.  The goodwill of the EDPR Group is tested for impairment each year with basis of September. In the case of operational wind farms, it is performed by determining the recoverable value through the value in use. Goodwill is allocated to each country calculate the recoverable amount of goodwill allocated. To perform this analysis, a Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) method was used. This method is based on the principle that the estimated value of an entity or business is defined by its capacity to generate financial resources in the future, assuming these of the activity. business, discounted at appropriate discount rates. The future cash flows projection period used is the useful life of the assets (30 years) which is consistent with the current depreciation method. The cash flows also incorporate the long-term off-take contract in place and long-term estimates of power prices, whenever the asset holds merchant exposure. The main assumptions used for the impairment tests are as follows: long-term predictability of wind output and that wind generation is supported in nearly all countries by regulatory mechanisms  not available, prices were derived using price curves projected by the company based on its experience, internal models and - New capacity: tests were based on the best information available on the wind farms expected to be built in coming years, adjusted by probability of success and by the growth prospects of the company based on the Business Plan Targets, its historical growth and market size projections. The tests considered the contracted and expected prices to buy turbines from  range as follows: Europe North America Brazil  2016  3.3%-5.6% 4.7%-6.7% 10.4%-12.8%  2015  3.8% - 6.0% 4.5% - 6.6% 9.6% - 11.7%  Impairment tests done have taken into account the regulation changes in each country, as disclosed in note 1.  256  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  4   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  EDPR has performed the following sensitivity analyses in the results of impairment tests performed in Europe, North America and Brazil in some of the key variables, such as: - 5% reduction of Merchant Prices used in the base case. This sensitivity analysis performed for this assumption independently would not suppose any impairment for the goodwill allocated to each country. - 100 basis points increase of the discount rate used in the base case. This sensitivity analysis performed for this assumption independently would not suppose any impairment for the goodwill allocated to each country.  18. Investments in Joint Ventures and Associates This caption is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  304,918 35,202 340,120  Investments in associates Interests in joint ventures Interests in associates Carrying amount  298,017 35,783 333,800  For the purpose of the consolidated financial statements presentation, goodwill arising from the acquisition of joint ventures and associated companies is presented in this caption. The movement in Investments in joint ventures and associates, is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  2016  Balance as at 1 January Acquisitions / Increases Disposals Share of profits of joint ventures and associates Dividends Exchange differences Hedging reserve in joint ventures and associates Changes in consolidation method Transfers to assets held for sale Balance as at 31 December  2015  333,800 4,655 225 -185 -6,781 7,263 1,143 340,120  369,791 9,553 -1,517 -11,540 22,959 3,094 -44,107 -14,433 333,800  The following table resumes the companies' financial information of joint ventures included in the Group consolidated accounts, as of December 2016: Flat rock Wind-power  Flat rock Wind-power II  Compañía Eólica Aragonesa  Companies' financial information of joint ventures Non-Current Assets Current Assets (including cash and cash equivalents) Cash and cash equivalents Total Equity Long term Financial debt Non-Current Liabilities Short term Financial debt Current Liabilities  291,444 2,129 1,043 289,096 4,084 393  117,915 795 413 116,973 1,534 203  127,057 5,186 3,787 104,595 24,645 3,003  302,602 40,449 12,019 8,737 239,071 262,480 71,834  57,319 9,621 5,390 22,286 13,600 15,656 26,203 28,998  Revenues Fixed and intangible assets amortisations Other financial expenses Income tax expense Net profit for the year  9,763 -19,051 -214 -22,893  3,681 -7,361 -64 -7,917  13,505 -11,051 -142 2,328 -1,938  205 -306 102 203  6,743 -2,512 -845 -368 1,100  Amounts proportionally attributed to EDPR Group Net assets Goodwill Dividends paid  158,413 2,615  58,487 -  57,425 39,558 3,452  14,438 -  16,155 2,667 -  Thousand Euros  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Eólica de Coahuila  Other  257 45   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  The following table resumes the companies' financial information of joint ventures included in the Group consolidated accounts, as of December 2015: Flat rock Wind-power  Flat rock Wind-power II  Compañía Eólica Aragonesa  Other  301,415 4,631 2,557 301,530 3,737 779  121,644 393 104 120,202 1,420 415  130,283 6,038 4,965 105,421 27,653 3,247  73,399 9,742 7,553 20,337 13,600 16,380 29,590 46,424  Net profit for the year  25,791 -21,479 -213 -8,834  5,437 -7,339 -64 -6,116  17,835 -10,306 -159 -95 379  4,238 -3,433 -1,100 399 -991  Amounts proportionally attributed to EDPR Group Net assets Goodwill Dividends paid  150,765 5,293  60,101 747  61,846 39,558 5,000  25,305 2,667 246  Thousand Euros Companies' financial information of joint ventures Non-Current Assets Cash and cash equivalents Total Equity Long term Financial debt Non-Current Liabilities Short term Financial debt Current Liabilities Revenues  amortisations  The following table resumes the companies' financial information of associates included in the Group consolidated accounts, as of December 2016: Pq. Eolico Belmonte  Thousand Euros  Les Eoliennes en Mer de Dieppe – le Treport  Pq. Eólico Sierra del Madero  Other  Companies' financial information of associates 21,231  21,857  52,429  89,165  Current Assets  2,517  8,472  8,683  19,581  Equity  4,590  12,745  24,006  47,625  15,105  13,825  2,455  55,871  Current Liabilities  4,053  3,759  34,651  5,250  Revenues  3,592  -  8,401  8,475  96  -678  475  -2,749  Net assets  3,099  5,480  10,082  16,541  Goodwill  1,726  -  -  6,479  -  -  -  714  Non-Current Assets  Non-Current Liabilities  Net profit for the year  Amounts proportionally attributed to EDPR Group  Dividends paid  258  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  4   ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  The following table resumes the companies' financial information of associates included in the Group consolidated accounts, as of December 2015: Pq. Eolico Belmonte  Les Eoliennes en Mer de Dieppe – le Treport  Pq. Eólico Sierra del Madero  Other  21,936  13,577  53,199  80,619  Current Assets  1,187  6,211  6,874  17,586  Equity  4,494  13,423  23,531  52,321  Non-Current Liabilities  4,544  -  1,883  28,464  14,085  6,365  34,659  17,420  3,933  -  10,146  8,215  275  -625  1,623  -13,042  Net assets  3,070  5,772  9,883  17,058  Goodwill  1,726  -  -  6,479  -  -  -  254  Thousand Euros  Companies' financial information of associates Non-Current Assets  Current Liabilities  Revenues Net profit for the year  Amounts proportionally attributed to EDPR Group  Dividends paid  During 2016, the significant companies' financial information of joint ventures and associates presented the following fair value reconciliation of net assets proportionally attributed to EDP Group: Thousand Euros  Equity 289,096 116,973 104,595 8,737 4,590 12,745 24,006  Flat Rock Windpower Flat Rock Windpower II LLC Compañía Eólica Aragonesa Eólica de Coahuila Parque Eólico Belmonte Les Eoliennes en Mer de Dieppe Parque Eólico Sierra del Madero  % Investment  50.00% 50.00% 50.00% 51.00% 29.90% 43.00% 42.00%  Fair value Adjustments  Goodwill 1,726 -  13,866 -  Net Assets  Others  5,128 9,982 -  158,413 58,487 57,425 14,438 3,099 5,480 10,082  During 2015, the significant companies' financial information of joint ventures and associates presents the following fair value reconciliation of net assets proportionally attributed to EDP Group: Thousand Euros Flat Rock Windpower Flat Rock Windpower II LLC Compañía Eólica Aragonesa Parque Eólico Belmonte Les Eoliennes en Mer de Dieppe Parque Eólico Sierra del Madero  Equity  % Investment  301,530 120,202 105,421 4,494 13,423 23,531  50.00% 50.00% 50.00% 29.90% 43.00% 42.00%  Fair value Adjustments  9,136 -  Goodwill  Others  1,726 -  -  Net Assets  150,765 60,101 61,846 3,070 5,772 9,883  There are no operating guarantees granted by joint ventures included in the Group consolidated accounts under the equity method, as at 31 December 2016 or 2015.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  259 47  259   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  The commitments relating to short and medium-long term financial debt, finance lease commitments, other long term included in the Group consolidated accounts under the equity method are disclosed, as at 31 December 2016 and 2015, are as follows: Thousand Euros  2016 Capital outstanding by maturity Than 1  1 to 3  3 to 5  Than 5  186,897  9,355  28,277  24,640  124,625  18,079 4,104 209,080  1,375 2,854 13,584  2,796 1,250 32,323  2,490 27,130  11,418 136,043  Total Short and long term financial debt Operating lease commitments Purchase obligations  Thousand Euros  2015 Capital outstanding by maturity Than 1  1 to 3  3 to 5  Than 5  21,673  14,745  5,166  1,762  -  19,666 7,975 49,314  1,356 5,058 21,159  2,755 2,587 10,508  2,814 330 4,906  12,741 12,741  Total Short and long term financial debt Operating lease commitments Purchase obligations  Significant increase in short and long term financial debt commitments with respect to 2015 mainly relates to the company  19. Deferred tax assets and liabilities determined on an accounting basis and on a tax basis, which are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  Deferred tax assets  Deferred tax liabilities  31 Dec 2016 Tax losses brought forward Provisions Derivative financial instruments Property, plant and equipment Allocation of fair value to assets and liabilities from business combinations Income from institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms Non-deductible financial expenses Netting of deferred tax assets and liabilities Other  31 Dec 2015  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  997,084 22,761 12,799 65,295 31,229 -1,053,819 491 75,840  975,700 22,506 10,469 48,391 32,562 -1,042,947 407 47,088  13,821 1,697 490,778 456,065 456,618 -1,053,819 -74 365,086  10,700 6,081 480,097 432,064 430,304 -1,042,947 198 316,497  In 31 December 2016, the caption Property, plant and equipment includes 19,481 thousand Euros of deferred tax assets  260  260  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  Deferred tax assets and liabilities is mainly related to Europe and United States of America, as follows: Thousand Euros  Europe: Tax losses brought forward Provisions Derivative financial instruments Property, plant and equipment Non-deductible financial expenses Allocation of fair value to assets and liabilities from business combinations Netting of deferred tax assets and liabilities Other  Deferred tax assets 31 Dec 31 Dec 2016 2015  Deferred tax liabilities 31 Dec 31 Dec 2016 2015  42,978 18,812 10,331 43,545 32,562 -  13,821 1,132 54,621 274,257  10,700 2,572 53,865 274,644  -102,766 491  -101,872 408  -102,766 89  -101,872 199  70,324  46,764  241,154  240,108  939,286 3,925 4,982 -947,773  928,626 3,531 4,846 -936,813  565 433,564 178,003 455,931 -947,773  3,508 422,776 154,204 429,628 -936,813  420  United States of America: Tax losses brought forward Provisions Derivative financial instruments Property, plant and equipment Allocation of fair value to assets and liabilities from business combinations Income from institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms Netting of deferred tax assets and liabilities  53,842 18,571 8,644 60,313 31,229 -  190  120,290  73,303  The movements in net deferred tax assets and liabilities during the year are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  Deferred tax assets 31 Dec 31 Dec 2016 2015  Balance as at 1 January  Deferred tax liabilities 31 Dec 31 Dec 2016 2015  47,088  Exchange differences and other variations Balance as at 31 December  316,497  270,392  19,607  17,777  13,531  -1,753  26,918  -9,187  -2,613  -17,254  3,894  41,761  75,840  Charges against reserves  46,488  30,136 1,230  Charges to the profit and loss account  47,088  365,086  316,497  The Group tax losses carried forward are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  Expiration date: 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 to 2036 Without expiration date  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  2,294 7,102 15,457 19,151 70,278 2,393,335 277,654  322 2,763 15,146 17,337 13,953 41,338 2,340,390 285,208  2,785,271  2,716,457  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  261 49  261   ENERGY ENERGY AS NEWART AS THETHE NEWART ENERGY AS THE NEWART  20. Inventories This caption is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  Advances on account of purchases Finished and intermediate products Raw and subsidiary materials and consumables  31 Dec 2015  1,333 5,816 16,754 23,903  2,832 4,611 15,319 22,762  21. Debtors and other assets from commercial activities Debtors and other assets from commercial activities are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  Impairment losses  4,407 10.632 24,534 39,573  231,981 3,295 8,349 4,485 32,429 280,539  Debtors and other assets from commercial activities - Current Trade receivables Prepaid turbine maintenance Services rendered Advances to suppliers Sundry debtors and other operations  31 Dec 2015  29,854 10,092 43,590 83,536  Debtors and other assets from commercial activities - Non-current Trade receivables Deferred costs Sundry debtors and other operations  218,477 4,988 8,158 2,893 26,784 261,300  -  -1,342  364,075  299,531  Trade rec respect 2015 is explained by the evolution of the energy pool prices in the Spanish market since the average of prices of the pool during the year 2016 is below the prices bands published by the Spanish Government. Counterparty credit risk management. The movement in Impairment losses on trade receivables, in 2016, for the Group is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros Balance at 1 January 1,342 1,342  Corporate sector and individuals  Charge for the period -  Reversal of impairment losses -  Charge-off  Exchange differences  Balance at 31 December  -1,342 -1,342  -  -  There were no changes in 2015.  22. Other debtors and other assets Other debtors and other assets are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  Other debtors and other assets - Non-current Loans to related parties Derivative financial instruments Sundry debtors and other operations Other debtors and other assets - Current Loans to related parties Derivative financial instruments Sundry debtors and other operations  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  24,275 28,920 6,650 59,845  1,036 29,480 45,139 75,655  36,226 26,146 40,119 102,491 162,336  28,609 25,792 11,632 66,033 141,688  Loans to related parties Non-Current as at 31 December 2016 mainly include 23,526 thousand Euros of loans to the equity consolidated Mexican company Eolica de Coahuila, S.A. de C.V. (8,504 thousand Euros as at 31 December 2015 in current loans) related to a new loan agreement subordinated to a Project Finance also signed by the company with a financial institution.  262  262  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  5   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  Loans to related parties - Current mainly include loans to the following equity consolidated companies: (i) 12,754 thousand Euros related to the Spanish company Parque Eólico Sierra del Madero, S.A. as at 31 December 2016 and 2015 (ii) 13,115 thousand Euros related to the offshore projects in France (with no balance as at December 31, 2015) and (iii) 3,426 thousand Euros related to the Spanish company AERE as at 31 December 2016 and 2015. Additionally, Sundry debtors Non-current included in 2015 advance payments amounting 33,750 thousands of Euros regarding the acquisition of the Italian project Banzi, which transaction has been closed in 2016 (see note 5 and 42). Sundry debtors – Current includes 24,961 thousands of Euros as at 31 December 2016 related with the estimated corporate income tax due by EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A. Sucursal en España (-11,545 thousand Euros as at 31 December 2015 in Other creditors – see note 33).  23. Current tax assets Current tax assets is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  Income tax Value added tax (VAT) Other taxes  31 Dec 2015  26,572 46,329 4,734 77,635  20,631 95,796 2,231 118,658  24. Cash and cash equivalents Cash and cash equivalents are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  264,985 21,970 120,921 407,876  189,665 70,815 38,048 298,528  195,343 603,219  Cash  138,201 436,732  -  Bank deposits Current deposits Term deposits Specific demand deposits in relation to institutional partnerships Other short term investments  3  Term deposits include temporary financial investments to place treasury surpluses. Specific demand deposits in relation to institutional partnerships are funds required to be held in escrow sufficient to pay the remaining construction related costs of projects in institutional equity partnerships (see note 32), under the accounting policy 2 w). The governing agreements of these partnerships and specific escrow agreements define the appropriate expenditure of these funds. As at December 31, 2016 the caption “Other short term investments” includes the balance of the current account with EDP Servicios Financieros España S.A. amounting to 195,343 thousand Euros (138,201 thousand Euros as at December 31, 2015) in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract signed between the parties on June 1, 2015.  25. Assets and liabilities held for sale The criteria for classifying assets and liabilities as held for sale and discontinued operations, as well as their presentation in the EDPR Group’s consolidated financial statements, are presented under accounting policies - note 2 j). This caption is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  Assets of the business of electricity generation – J&Z Assets of the business of electricity generation – Inch Cape Assets held for sale  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  -  -55,406 -55,406  Liabilities of the business of electricity generation – J&Z Liabilities held for sale  -  69,527 40,164 109,691  In October 2015, management committed to a plan to do a cross sale of two wind farms in Poland. EDPR would be acquiring remaining 35% in the Company Molen Wind II, S.P. ZO.O and would sell 60% of company J&Z Wind Farms SP. ZO.O. Accordingly, assets and liabilities related to J&Z Wind Farms SP. ZO.O were presented as assets and liabilities held for sale as at 31 December 2015. The closing of this transaction took place in March 2016 with a sale price of 12,891 thousand Euros. At the transaction date, J&Z had no Cash and cash equivalents. Total impact of the transaction of selling the company J&Z Wind Farms SP. ZO.O in the consolidated Profit and Loss of the consolidated financial statements amounts to 6,958 thousand Euros  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  263 51  263   ENERGY AS THE NEWART ENERGY AS THE NEWART  the contracts, EDPR agreed to buy from Repsol 33% equity interest in the Moray offshore project, and to sell to Repsol 49% sale price of 15,802 thousand Euros. Total impact of the transaction of selling the company Inch Cape Offshore Limited in the consolidated Profit and Loss of the consolidated financial statements amounts to a gain of 2,324 thousand Euros.  26. Share capital and share premium At 31 December 2016 and 2015, the share capital of the Company is represented by 872,308,162 shares of Euros 5 par value each, all fully paid. The shares are in book-entry bearer form, the company is entitled to request the listing of its shares and all the shareholders are registered in the relevant book-entry records. These shares have the same voting and profit-sharing rights and are freely transferable. EDP Renováveis, S.A. shareholder's structure as at 31 December 2016 and 2015 is analysed as follows:  No. Of shares  % capital  % voting rights  196,024,306  EDP (EDP Branch)  22.47%  22.47%  676,283,856  77.53%  77.53%  On Decemb block of shares, so that, as at December 2015 EDP holds directly, through its Spanish branch, a qualified shareholding of 77.5% any shareholding in EDPR. Share capital and Share premium are analysed as follows: Euros  Share Capital  Movements during the period  Share Premium  4,361,540,810 -  552,034,743 -  The share premium is freely distributable. Earnings per share attributable to the shareholders of EDPR are analysed as follows: 31 Dec 2016 Profit attributable to the equity holders of the parent (in thousand Euros) Profit from continuing operations attributable to the equity holders of the parent (in thousand Euros) outstanding Earnings per share (basic) attributable to equity holders of the parent (in Euros) Earnings per share (diluted) attributable to equity holders of the parent (in Euros) Earnings per share (basic) from continuing operations attributable to the equity holders of the parent (in Euros) Earnings per share (diluted) from continuing operations attributable to the equity holders of the parent (in Euros)  31 Dec 2015  56,328  166,614  56,328 872,308,162 872,308,162 0.06  166,614 872,308,162 872,308,162 0.19  0.06  0.19  0.06  0.19  0.06  0.19  The EDPR Group calculates its basic and diluted earnings per share attributable to equity holders of the parent using the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. The company does not hold any treasury stock as at 31 December 2016 and 2015. The average number of shares was determined as follows: 31 Dec 2016 Ordinary shares issued at the beginning of the period Effect of shares issued during the period Average number of realised shares Average number of shares during the period Diluted average number of shares during the period  264  31 Dec 2015  872,308,162 872,308,162 872,308,162 872,308,162  872,308,162 872,308,162 872,308,162 872,308,162  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  5   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  27. Other comprehensive income, reserves and retained earnings This caption is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  Other comprehensive income: Fair value reserve (cash flow hedge) Fair value reserve (available-for-sale financial assets) Exchange differences arising on consolidation Other reserves and retained earnings: Retained earnings and other reserves Additional paid in capital Legal reserve  31 Dec 2015  -33,425 6,132 7,641 -19,652  -22,356 4,346 -18,928 -36,938  1,054,239 60,666 59,805 1,174,710 1,155,058  810,436 60,666 56,646 927,748 890,810  Additional paid in capital The accounting for transactions among entities under common control is excluded from IFRS 3. Consequently, in the absence of specific guidance, within IFRSs, the Group EDPR has adopted an accounting policy for such transactions, judged appropriate. According to the Group's policy, business combinations among entities under common control are accounted for in the consolidated financial statements using the book values of the acquired company (subgroup) in the EDPR consolidated financial statements. The difference between the carrying amount of the net assets received and the consideration paid is recognised in equity. Legal reserve The legal reserve has been appropriated in accordance with Article 274 of the Spanish Companies Act whereby companies are obliged to transfer 10% of the profits for the year to a legal reserve until such reserve reaches an amount equal to 20% of the share capital. This reserve is not distributable to shareholders and may only be used to offset losses, if no other reserves are available, or to increase the share capital. Profit distribution (parent company) The EDP Renováveis, S.A. proposal for 2016 profits distribution to be presented in the Annual General Meeting is as follows: Euros Base for distribution:  45,516,908.82  Profit for the period 2016 Retained earnings from previous years  19,015,007.22 26,501,901.60  Euros Distribution: Legal reserve Dividends  45,516,908.82 1,901,500.72 43,615,408.10  The EDP Renováveis, S.A. proposal for 2015 profits distribution that was presented in the Annual General Meeting is as follows: Euros  Base for distribution: Profit for the period 2015 Retained earnings from previous years  46,775,094.26 31,596,861.64 15,178,232.62  Distribution: Legal reserve Dividends  46,775,094.26 3,159,686.16 43,615,408.10  Euros  Fair value reserve (cash flow hedge) The Fair value reserve (cash flow hedge) comprises the effective portion of the cumulative net change in the fair value of cash flow hedging instruments.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  265 53   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  This reserve includes the cumulative net change in the fair value of available-for-sale financial assets as at the balance sheet date. Thousand Euros  2,603 1,743  Balance as at 31 December 2015  4,346 1,786 6,132  This caption reflects the amount arising on the translation of the financial statements of subsidiaries and associated companies from their functional currency into Euros. The exchange rates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements are as follows: Thousand Euros Currency  Exchange rates As at 31 December 2016 Closing Average Rate Rate  US Dollar  Exchange rates As at 31 December 2015 Closing Average Rate Rate  USD  1.054  1.107  1.089  1.110  PLN  4.410  4.363  4.264  4.184  BRL  3.431  3.858  4.312  3.699  New Leu  RON  4.539  4.491  4.524  4.446  Pound Sterling  GBP  0.856  0.819  0.734  0.726  Canadian Dollar  CAD  1.419  1.466  1.512  1.419  28. Non-controlling interests This caption is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  31 Dec 2016  Non-controlling interests in income statement Non-controlling interests in share capital and reserves  31 Dec 2015  119,784 1,328,268 1,448,052  78,877 784,232 863,109  Non-controlling interests, by subgroup, are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros EDPR NA Group EDPR EU Group EDPR BR Group  905,142 485,577 57,333 1,448,052  614,350 208,211 40,548 863,109  The movement in non-controlling interests of EDP Renováveis Group is mainly related to: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  Dividends distribution Net profit for the year Exchange differences arising on consolidation Other changes  266  863,109 -42,563 119,784 42,730 517,179 -63,659 11,472 1,448,052  31 Dec 2015  549,113 -43,184 78,877 16,415 306,529 -45,439 798 863,109  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  5   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  29. Financial debt Financial debt current and Non-current is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  542,145 120,409 23,722  812,231 97,533 25,453  424,441 2,181,754  410,952 2,485,106  120 3,292,591  1,138 3,832,413  -28,974 -28,974  -65,299 -65,299  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  78,165 13,243 7,777  123,238 7,511 3,978  10,868  241,000  1,315 2,110 113,478  8,905 3,225 387,857  -17,072 -17,072  -8,054 -8,054  Financial debt - Non-current Bank loans: - EDPR EU Group - EDPR BR Group - EDPR NA Group Loans received from EDP group entities: - EDP Renováveis, S.A. - EDP Renováveis Servicios Financieros, S.L. Other loans: - EDPR EU Group Total Debt and borrowings - Non-current Collateral Deposits - Non-current (*) Collateral Deposit - Project Finance and others Total Collateral Deposits - Non-current  Thousand Euros  Financial debt - Current Bank loans: - EDPR EU Group - EDPR BR Group - EDPR NA Group Loans received from EDP group entities: - EDP Renováveis Servicios Financieros, S.L. Other loans: - EDPR EU Group Interest payable Total Debt and borrowings - Current Collateral Deposits - Current (*) Collateral Deposit - Project Finance and others Total Collateral Deposits - Current  Total Debt and borrowings – Current and Non-current 3,406,069 4,220,270 Total Debt and borrowings net of collaterals – Current and Non-current 3,360,023 4,146,917 (*) Collateral deposits mainly refer to amounts held in bank accounts to comply with obligations under project finance agreements entered into by certain EDP Renewable subsidiaries.  Financial debt Non-current for EDP Renováveis, mainly refers to a set of loans granted by EDP Finance BV amounting to 1,397,195 thousand Euros and by EDP Servicios Financieros España S.A. amounting to 1,209,000 thousand Euros (1,687,058 thousand Euros and 1,209,000 thousand Euros respectively as at 31 December 2015). These loans have an average maturity of 2 and a half years and bear interest at fixed market rates. Main event of the period refers to financing and refinancing transactions. Taking into account the EDPR Group external debt profile as well as the favorable interest rate market conditions, EDPR Group has entered into several negotiation processes with different counterparties aiming to improve the average cost of debt, adjusting the debt service profile to the company updated cash flow forecast. The main transactions performed throughout the year are as following: (i)  In Spain, the group reimbursed 5 Spanish projects bank loans totaling Euro 53,621 thousand Euro that have been replaced by corporate financing;  (ii)  In Poland, a project finance was reimbursed for 77,396 thousand Euro, refinanced with a new one signed with a another bank for 54,418 thousand Euro;  (iii)  In Romania 8 project finance related with solar farms totaling 145,806 thousand Euro have been reimbursed and replaced by corporate financing; and  (iv)  In Portugal 8 project finance were reimbursed for 8,822 thousand Euro.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  267 55  267   ENERGY ENERGY NEWART AS THE ENERGY AS THETHE NEWART AS NEWART  As at 31 December 2016, future debt and borrowings payments and interest by type of loan and currency are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  2017  2018  2019  2020  2021  80,275 13,243 7,777 101,295  46,221 13,243 20,332 79,796  49,616 13,039 21,954 84,609  50,315 12,425 23,444 86,184  49,771 8,747 25,800 84,318  160,615 72,955 117,799 351,369  436,813 133,652 217,106 787,571  10,868 10,868  362,900 1,397,195 1,760,095  362,900 362,900  483,200 483,200  -  -  1,219,868 1,397,195 2,617,063  1,315 1,315 113,478  70 70 1,839,961  50 50 447,559  569,384  84,318  351,369  1,435 1,435 3,406,069  Bank loans Euro Brazilian Real Others  Loans received from EDP group companies Euro American Dollar  Total  years  Other loans Euro  As at 31 December 2015, future debt and borrowings payments and interest by type of loan and currency are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  2016  2017  2018  2019  2020  109,760 3,902 23,804 137,466  65,153 3,902 26,914 95,969  65,968 3,902 29,081 98,951  65,055 3,902 30,790 99,747  66,506 3,902 30,473 100,881  333,022 916 205,731 539,669  705,464 20,426 346,793 1,072,683  241,000 486 241,486  121,300 121,300  241,600 1,352,791 1,594,391  362,900 334,267 697,167  483,200 483,200  -  1,450,000 1,687,544 3,137,544  8,905 8,905 387,857  1,138 1,138 218,407  1,693,342  796,914  584,081  539,669  10,043 10,043 4,220,270  Bank loans Euro Brazilian Real Others  Loans received from EDP group companies Euro American Dollar  years  Total  Other loans Euro  689,803 thousand Euros (31 December 2015: 1,030,764 thousand Euros), which are included in the total debt of the Group.  Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2015 Carrying  3,292,591  3,326,757  3,832,413  113,478  113,478  387,857  387,857  3,406,069  - Non-current ancial debt - Current  31 Dec 2016 Carrying  3,440,235  4,220,270  4,273,825  3,885,968  based on the discounted cash flows at the rates ruling at the balance sheet date. The market value of debt and borrowing that bear a floating interest rate is considered not to differ from its book value as these loans bear interest at a rate indexed to Euribor. The book value of the short-term (current) debt and borrowings is considered to be the market value.  268  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  5   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  30. Provisions Provisions are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  Dismantling and decommission provisions Provision for other liabilities and charges Long-term provision for other liabilities and charges Short-term provision for other liabilities and charges Employee benefits  31 Dec 2016  268,191 6,275 744 5,531 596 275,062  31 Dec 2015  117,228 1,542 623 919 2,663 121,433  Dismantling and decommission provisions refer to the costs to be incurred for dismantling wind and solar farms and restoring sites and land to their original condition, in accordance with the accounting policy described in note 2 o). The above amount respects to 104,274 thousand Euros for wind farms in North America (31 December 2015: 60,393 thousand Euros), 162,413 thousand Euros for wind farms in Europe (31 December 2015: 56,351 thousand Euros) and 1,504 thousand Euros for wind farms in Brazil (31 December 2015: 484 thousand Euros). Amounts have significantly increased with respect to the previous year due to the net effect of: i) the extension of the useful life of the renewable assets from 25 to 30 years (see note 2 h and 3) being therefore the capitalisation rate (number of years) of the dismantling and decommissioning provisions 30 years ii) the aforementioned cost to be incurred that has been revised according to an in-deep analysis performed by the EDPR’s technical department; and iii) the update of the discount rates (see note 2 o). EDP Renováveis believes that the provisions booked on the consolidated statement of financial position adequately cover the foreseeable obligations described in this note. Therefore, it is not expected that they will give rise to liabilities in addition to those recorded. The movements in Provisions for dismantling and decommission provisions are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  142,595  3,960  48  7,361  Unwinding  4,610  4,006  Other and exchange differences  3,710  5,225  268,191  117,228  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  -362 28  -192 -312  6,275  1,542  Balance at the beginning of the year  117,228  Capitalised amount for the year Changes in the perimeter  Balance at the end of the year  96,676  The movements in Provision for other liabilities and charges are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  Balance at the beginning of the year Charge for the year  1,542 5,067  Write back for the year Other and exchange differences Balance at the end of the year  2,026 20  31. Institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms This caption is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  Deferred income related to benefits provided Liabilities arising from institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  819,199 1,520,226 2,339,425  791,444 1,164,773 1,956,217  The movements in Institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  Balance at the beginning of the period Proceeds received from institutional investors Cash paid for deferred transaction costs Cash paid to institutional investors Income (see note 7) Unwinding (see note 13) Exchange differences Prepaid benefits Transactions which flip date has been reached Others Balance at the end of the period  1,956,217 628,381 -4,541 -172,052 -197,544 90,337 79,411 1,388 -42,172 2,339,425  1,801,963 249,274 -7,457 -173,343 -197,442 78,953 206,537 3,407 -5,675 1,956,217  The Group has entered in several partnerships with institutional investors in the United States, through limited liability companies operating agreements that apportions the cash flows generated by the wind farms between the investors and the  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  269 57   ENERGY AS THE NEWART ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Company and allocates the tax benefits, which include Production Tax Credits (PTC), Investment Tax Credits (ITC) and accelerated depreciation, largely to the investor. During 2016 EDPR Group, through its subsidiary EDPR NA, has secured and received proceeds amounting to 310,334 thousand  proceeds amounting to 215,256 thousands of Euros related to institutional equity financing from an affiliate of Google Inc.,  32. Trade and other payables from commercial activities Thousand Euros  Trade and other payables from commercial activities - Non-current Government grants / subsidies for investments in fixed assets Electricity sale contracts - EDPR NA Other creditors and sundry operations  Trade and other payables from commercial activities - Current Suppliers Property and equipment suppliers Other creditors and sundry operations  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  426,535 19,857 17,516 463,908  435,753 24,223 6,320 466,296  83,173 665,806 61,152 810,131 1,274,  79,886 645,752 61,719 787,357 1,253,653  Government grants for investments in fixed assets are essentially related to grants received by EDPR NA subgroup under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act promoted by the United States of America Government. At the moment of the EDPR North America acquisition, the contracts signed between this subsidiary and its customers, determined under the terms of the Purchase Price Allocation, were valued through discounted cash flow models and market assumptions at 190,400 thousands of USD, being booked as a non-current liability under Electricity sale contracts - EDPR NA, which is depreciated over the useful life of the contracts under Other income (see note 8).  33. Other liabilities and other payables Other liabilities and other payables are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  Other liabilities and other payables - Non-current Success fees payable for the acquisition of subsidiaries Loans from non-controlling interests Derivative financial instruments Other creditors and sundry operations Other liabilities and other payables - Current Success fees payable for the acquisition of subsidiaries Derivative financial instruments Loans from non-controlling interests Other creditors and sundry operations  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  9,813 553,988 580,729 9,907 1,154,437  10,764 180,679 521,004 58 712,505  7,069 190,438 56,099 5,285 258,891 1,413,328  1,350 158,157 28,277 13,998 201,782  Success fees payable for the acquisition of subsidiaries non-current includes the amounts related to the contingent prices of Derivative financial instruments non-current and current mainly includes 510,006 and 158,041 thousand Euros respectively (31 December 2015: 449,706 and 139,247 thousand Euros respectively) related to a hedge instrument of USD and EUR with EDP USD (see note 35).  270  270  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  The caption Loans from non-controlling interests Current and Non-Current mainly includes: i) loans granted by Vortex Energy Investments II due to the sale in 2016 of 49% of shareholding in EDPR Participaciones S.L. and subsidiaries (see note 5) for a total amount of 245,981 thousands of Euros, including accrued interests (with no balances as at 31 December 2015), bearing interest at a fixed rate of a range between 3.3% and 7.55%; ii) loans granted by CTG due to the sale in 2016 of 49% of shareholding in EDP Renewables Polska HoldCo, S.A. and subsidiaries (see note 5) for a total amount of 120,390 thousands of Euros including accrued interests (with no balances as at 31 December 2015), bearing interest at a fixed rate of a range between 1.7% and 7.23%; iii) loans granted by CTG due to the sale in 2016 of 49% of shareholding in EDP Renewables Italia, S.r.l. and subsidiaries (see note 5) for a total amount of 83,618 thousands of Euros including accrued interests (with no balances as at 31 December 2015), bearing interest at a fixed rate of 4.5%. iv) loans granted by CTG due to the sale in 2013 of 49% of shareholding in EDP Renováveis Portugal, S.A. for a total amount of 71,501 thousands of Euros including accrued interests (31 December 2015: 81,314 thousands of Euros). The maturity date of this loan is December 2022, bearing interest at a fixed rate of 5.5%. v) loans granted by Vortex Energy Investments I due to the sale in 2014 of 49% of shareholding in EDPR France and subsidiaries for a total amount of 66,264 thousands of Euros, including accrued interests (31 December 2015: 76,990 thousands of Euros), bearing interest at a fixed rate of a range between 3.1% and 7.18%. As at 31 December 2016 Other creditors and sundry operations – Non-current includes 3,225 thousands Euros in relation to the amount to be paid in 2018 concerning the tax effect of the revaluation of assets in Portugal according to Decree 66/2016 (see note 14). Additionally, this caption also includes the liability related to the put options over the stake that the other shareholders hold in the Italian companies Tivano S.r.l., San Mauro S.r.l. and AW 2 S.r.l. amounting to 2,299 thousand Euros (see note 5 and 36). As at 31 December 2015 Other creditors and sundry operations - Current included 11,545 thousands of Euros related with the corporate income tax due to EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A. Sucursal en España (see note 22 for the estimated corporate income tax due by EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A. Sucursal en España as at 31 December 2016) The average payment information is the following: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  52 61 20  70 72 64  123,520 33,781  DAYS Average payment period Ratio paid operations Ratio of pending operations THOUSANDS OF EUROS Total payments made Total outstanding payments  106,480 27,513  The Company has prepared the information according to criterion required by the Spanish Accounting and Auditing Institute (ICAC) resolution of 29 January 2016 on disclosures in notes to financial statements of late payments to suppliers in commercial transactions.  34. Current tax liabilities This caption is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  Income tax Withholding tax Value added tax (VAT) Other taxes  31 Dec 2016  27,993 27,420 17,386 15,647 88,446  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  31 Dec 2015  10,883 25,454 17,540 10,408 64,285  271 59 271   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  35. Derivative financial instruments As of 31 December 2016, the fair value and maturity of derivatives is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  Fair value  Notional 1 to More than 5 years 5 years  Assets  -670,981  505,980  1,537,581  -  2,043,561  -670,981  505,980  1,537,581  -  2,043,561  22,212 7 22,219  -36,885 -32,821 -11,924 -81,630  243,732 100,006 36,643 380,381  331,023 394,754 725,777  386,761 386,761  574,755 881,521 36,643 1,492,919  17,876 2,049 455 20,380 55,066  Trading Power price swaps Interest rate swaps Cross currency rate swaps Currency forwards  Until 1 year  12,467 Cash flow hedge Power price swaps Interest rate swaps Currency forwards  Liabilities  12,467  Net investment hedge Cross currency rate swaps  Total  -18,274 -33 -6 -243 -18,556 -771,167  24,827 941 21,000 46,896 93,664 980,025  28,024 941 9,191 38,156 2,301,514  386,761  52,851 1,882 30,191 46,896 131,820 3,668,300  As of 31 December 2015, the fair value and maturity of derivatives is analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  Fair value  Notional More than 5 years  Assets Net investment hedge Cross currency rate swaps Currency forwards Cash flow hedge Power price swaps Interest rate swaps Trading Power price swaps Interest rate swaps Cross currency rate swaps Currency forwards  Liabilities  Until 1 year  1 to 5 years  14,509  -589,051  532,442  1,457,332  -  1,989,774  554 15,063  -589,051  15,812 548,254  1,457,332  -  15,812 2,005,586  31,015 31,015  -14,660 -64,092 -78,752  206,763 105,629 312,392  127,604 491,140 618,744  523,650 523,650  334,367 1,120,419 1,454,786  4,679 -  -4,109 -65  38,199 941  15,232 1,881  -  53,431 2,822  Total  2,503  -  -  98,482  -  98,482  2,012 9,194 55,272  -7,184 -11,358 -679,161  486,224 525,364 1,386,010  115,595 2,191,671  523,650  486,224 640,959 4,101,331  The fair value of derivative financial instruments is recorded under other debtors and other assets (note 22) or other liabilities and other payables (note 33), if the fair value is positive or negative, respectively. The net investment derivatives are related to the Group CIRS in USD and EUR with EDP Branch as referred in the notes 37 and 38. The net investment derivatives also include CIRS in CAD, PLN and BRL with EDP with the purpose of hedging EDPR Group's operations in Canada, Poland and Brazil.  Cash flow hedge power price swaps are related to the hedging of the sales price. EDPR NA has entered into a power price swap both EDPR NA and EDPR EU have entered in short term hedges to hedge the short-term volatility of certain un-contracted generation of its wind farms. In certain U.S. power markets, EDPR NA is exposed to congestion and line loss risks, which typically have a negative impact on the price received for power generated in these markets. To economically hedge these risk exposures, EDPR NA entered into The trading derivative financial instruments are derivatives contracted for economic hedging that are not eligible for hedge accounting. These included in 2015 and during 2016 a USD/EUR forward contract with EDP Servicios Financieros used to mitigate the exchange rate risk arising from the net assets in USD, as a complement of the net investment hedge. This forward contract has been settled in December 2016.  272  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  6   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Fair value of derivative financial instruments is based on quotes indicated by external entities, which are compared in each date of report to fair values available in common financial information platforms. These entities use discounted cash flows techniques usually accepted and data from public markets. The only exceptions are the CIRS in USD/EUR with EDP Branch and the USD/EUR forward contract with EDP Servicios Financieros, which fair values are determined by the Financial Department of EDP, using the same above-mentioned discounted cash flows techniques and data. As such, according to IFRS13 requirements, the fair value of the derivative financial instruments is classified as of level 2 (see note 38) and no changes of level were made during this period. The changes in the fair value of hedging instruments and risks being hedged are as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  Changes in fair value  Changes in fair value  Instrument Net Investment hedge Net Investment hedge Cash-flow hedge Cash-flow hedge Cash-flow hedge  Cross currency rate swaps Currency forward Interest rate swap Power price swaps Currency forward  Risk  Instrument  Risk  Subsidiary accounts in USD, PLN, BRL, CAD Subsidiary accounts in CAD  -83,972  78,668  -246,205  244,777  -554  554  554  -807  Interest rate Power price Exchange rate  31,278 -31,028 -11,924 -96,200  79,222  -8,690 8,332 -246,009  243,970  During 2016 and 2015 the following market inputs were considered for the fair value calculation: Instrument  Market input  Interest rate swaps Foreign exchange forwards  'Fair value indexed to the following interest rates: Euribor 3M, Euribor 6M, Wibor 3M, Wibor 6M and CAD Libor 3M. 'Fair value indexed to the following exchange rates: USD/EUR, EUR/RON, EUR/PLN, EUR/CAD, BRL/USD and BRL/EUR. Fair value indexed to the price of electricity.  Cross currency interest rate swaps  Power price swaps  'Fair value indexed to the following interest rates: Euribor 3M, Euribor 6M, daily brazilian CDI, Wibor 3M; and exchange rates: EUR/BRL, EUR/PLN e EUR/USD.  The movements in cash flow hedge reserve have been as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  Balance at the beginning of the year Fair value changes Transfers to results Non-controlling interests included in fair value changes Effect of the sale without loss of control of EDPR Europe subsidiaries Effect of the sale without loss of control of EDPR North America subsidiaries Effect of the Asset Split ENEOP (see note 42) Balance at the end of the year  -27,366 -38,559 19,773 -3,010 4,584 -1,338 -45,916  31 Dec 2015  -52,568 17,930 2,404 -1,231 -7,760 -1,472 15,331 -27,366  The gains and losses on the financial instruments portfolio booked in the income statement are as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  31 Dec 2015  -18,217 -1,556 3,688 -21,389  Net investment hedge - ineffectiveness Cash-flow hedge Transfer to results from hedging of financial liabilities Transfer to results from hedging of commodity prices Non eligible for hedge accounting derivatives  -773 -1,631 4,892 807  -5,304  -1,681  The amount from transfers to results from hedging of commodity prices is registered in Revenues while the remaining gains and losses are registered in Financial income and Financial expense, respectively (see note 13). The effective interest rates for derivative financial instruments associated with financing operations during 2016, were as follows: Thousand Euros  Currency  Interest rate contracts Interest rate swaps Interest rate swaps Interest rate swaps Currency and interest rate contracts CIRS (currency interest rate swaps) CIRS (currency interest rate swaps) CIRS (currency interest rate swaps)  EUR PLN CAD EUR/CAD EUR/BRL EUR/PLN  Pays [ 0.18% [ 2.48%  -  4.45% ] 2.78% ] [ 2.59% ]  [ 1.23% - 1.33% ] [ 11.04% - 12.69% ] [ 1.33% - 2.12% ]  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Edp Renováveis Group Receives [ -0,22%  -  [ -0,32%  -  -0.18% ] [ 1.81% ] [ 0.91% ] [ -0.32% ] [ -0.30% ] -0.31% ]  273 61   ENERGY ENERGY AS NEWART AS THETHE NEWART ENERGY AS THE NEWART  The effective interest rates for derivative financial instruments associated with financing operations during 2015, were as follows: Thousand Euros  Currency  Interest rate contracts Interest rate swaps Interest rate swaps Interest rate swaps Currency and interest rate contracts CIRS (currency interest rate swaps) CIRS (currency interest rate swaps) CIRS (currency interest rate swaps)  Edp Renováveis Group Receives  Pays  EUR PLN CAD  -  . .  EUR/USD EUR/BRL EUR/PLN  .  . .  -  . . .  -  . . .  -  -0.05% .  . -0.13% -0 .13%  -  . . .  . - - . - - .  36. Commitments As at 31 December 2016 and 2015, the financial commitments not included in the statement of financial position in respect of financial, operational and real guarantees provided, are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  31 Dec 2016  12,061 12,061  1,079,869 1,224,085 44,544 18,622 2,367,120  Guarantees of operational nature EDP Renováveis, S.A. EDPR NA Group EDPR EU Group EDPR BR Group  31 Dec 2015  21,039 21,039  Guarantees of financial nature EDPR NA Group  1,033,550 1,227,058 4,390 11,478 2,276,476 2,288  3,318  As at 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015, EDPR has operational guarantees regarding its commercial activity, in the amount of 495,692 thousand Euros and 552,146 thousand Euros respectively, already reflected in liabilities. There are no guarantees related to associated companies (see note 18). Regarding the information disclosed above:  ii) EDPR NA is providing its tax equity investors with standard corporate guarantees typical of these agreements to indemnify them against costs they may incur as a result of fraud, willful misconduct or a breach of EDPR NA of any operational obligation under the tax equity agreements. As at 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015, EDPR's obligations under the tax equity agreements, in the amount of 1,428,275 thousand Euros and 1,165,270 thousand Euros respectively are reflected in the statement of financial position under the caption Institutional Partnerships in U.S. Wind Farms. iii) The financial guarantees contracted as at 31 December 2016 amounting to 5,434 thousand Euros are related to the loans obtained by certain companies of the Group and already included in the consolidated financial debt. The EDPR Group financial debt, lease and purchase obligations by maturity date are as follows: Thousand Euros Total Operating lease rents not yet due Purchase obligations  1,271,873 2,288,163 36  Up to 1 year  44,596 864,089 8,  1 to 3 years  31 Dec 2016 Capital outstanding by maturity 3 to More than 5 years 5 years  1 to 3 years  31 Dec 2015 Capital outstanding by maturity 3 to More than 5 years 5 years  93,536 721,378 814,914  Thousand Euros Total Operating lease rents not yet due Purchase obligations Other long term commitments  274  1,026,046 2,368,026 965  Up to 1 year  39,892 1,291,480 702  81,506 769,444 263 13  95,279 124,917 2 ,196  83,218 90,148 173,366  1,038,462 577,779 1,616,241  821,430 216,954 -  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  6   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUALEDPR 2016 REPORT EDPR 2016  Purchase obligations include debts related with long-term agreements of property, plant and equipment and operational and maintenance contracts product and services supply related to the Group operational activity. When prices are defined under forward contracts, these are used in estimating the amounts of the contractual commitments. The Operating lease rents not yet due are essentially related with the land where the wind farms are built. Usually the leasing period cover the useful life of the wind farms. As at 31 December 2016 the Group has the following contingent liabilities/rights related with put options on investments: -  The other shareholder of the company Tivano S.r.l. holds a put option over a 25% stake of the company. The exercise price shall be 450 thousand Euros plus 100% of any contributions made by the other shareholder minus 100% of any distributions made by the company to the other shareholder, being the exercise period from 2016 to 2020. As at 31 December 2016 the put option amounts to 1,575 thousand Euros.  -  The other shareholder of the company San Mauro S.r.l. holds a put option over a 25% stake of the company. The exercise price shall be 25% of the final purchase price plus 100% of any contributions made by the other shareholder minus 100% of any distributions made by the company to the other shareholder, being the exercise period from 2017 to 2022. As at 31 December 2016 the put option amounts to 341 thousand Euros.  -  The other shareholder of the company AW 2 S.r.l. holds a put option over a 25% stake of the company. The exercise price shall be 25% of the final purchase price plus 100% of any contributions made by the other shareholder minus 100% of any distributions made by the company to the other shareholder, being the exercise period from 2017 to 2022. As at 31 December 2016 the put option amounts to 383 thousand Euros.  Some of the disposal of non-controlling interests transactions retaining control carried out in 2016 an in previous years incorporate contingent assets and liabilities according to the terms of the corresponding agreements.  37. Related parties The number of shares held by company officers as at 31 December 2016 and 2015 are as follows: Thousand Euros Executive Board of Directors António Luís Guerra Nunes Mexia Nuno Maria Pestana de Almeida Alves Miguel Dias Amaro Acácio Jaime Liberado Mota Piloto António do Pranto Nogueira Leite Gabriel Alonso Imaz João José Belard da Fonseca Lopes Raimundo João Manuel de Mello Franco João Paulo Nogueira Sousa Costeira Jorge Manuel Azevedo Henriques dos Santos José António Ferreira Machado  31 Dec 2016 No. Of shares  31 Dec 2015 No. Of shares  4,200 5,000 25 300 100 26,503 840 380 3,000 200 630 41,178  4,200 5,000 25 300 100 26,503 840 380 3,000 200 630 41,178  According to Article nr 229 of "Ley de Sociedades de Capital" (Spanish Companies Law), the members of the Board of Directors of EDP Renováveis have not communicated, or the parent company has knowledge, of any conflict of interests or incompatibility that could affect the performance of their duties. Remuneration of company officers In accordance with the Company's by-laws, the remuneration of the members of the Board of Directors is proposed by the Nominations and Remunerations Committee to the Board of Directors on the basis of the overall amount of remuneration authorized by the General Meeting of Shareholders. The Board of Directors approves the distribution and exact amount paid to each Director on the basis of this proposal. The remuneration paid to the members of the Executive Board of Directors in 2016 and 2015 were as follows: Thousand Euros CEO Board members  31 Dec 2016  723 723  31 Dec 2015  689 689  EDPR signed an Executive Management Services Agreement with EDP, under which EDP bears the cost for the services render by its Executive and Non-Executive Directors, which are João Manso Neto, Nuno Alves and António Mexia. This corporate governance practice of remuneration is in line with the model adopted by the EDP Group, in which the executive Directors of EDP do not receive any remuneration directly from the group companies on whose governing bodies they serve, but rather through EDP.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  275 63  275   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  Under this contract, EDPR is due to pay an amount to EDP, for the services rendered by the Executive Managers and the Nonexecutive Managers. The amount due under said Agreement for the management services rendered by EDP in 2016 is 1,132 thousand Euros (1,089 thousand Euros in 2015), of which 1,087 thousand Euros refers to the management services rendered by the Executive Members and 45 thousand Euros to the management services rendered by the non-executive Members. The retirement savings plan for the members of the Executive Committee not including the Chief Executive Officer range between 3% to 6% of their annual salary. In the case of the members of the Executive Committee that are also Officers (Miguel Dias Amaro, CFO; João Paulo Costeira, COO EU, BR & South Africa; and Gabriel Alonso COO NA & Mexico), there are contracts that were signed with other group companies, as follows: Miguel Dias Amaro and João Paulo Costeira with EDP Energias de Portugal S.A. Sucursal en España; and Gabriel Alonso with EDP Renewables North America LLC. The total remuneration of this three Officers in 2016, was 1,078 thousand Euros (1,049 thousand Euros in 2015), corresponding to the fixed remuneration and 2016 annual variable remuneration. The Company has no pension or life insurance obligations with its former or current Board members in 2016 or 2015. Relevant balances and transactions with subsidiaries and associates of China Three Gorges Group Within the context of the transactions with CTG related to the sale of 49% of EDPR Portugal, EDPR Italia and EDPR Polska equity shareholding to CTG Group, CTG has granted loans to the EDPR Group in the amount of 275,509 thousand Euros including accrued interests (53,134 thousand Euros as current and 222,375 thousand Euros as non-current). This balance amounted to 81,314 thousand Euros including accrued interests (9,824 thousand Euros as current and 71,490 thousand Euros as noncurrent) as at 31 December 2015. See note 33. Balances and transactions with EDP Group companies As at 31 December 2016, assets and liabilities with related parties, are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A. EDP - Energias de Portugal, S.A. Sucursal en España (EDP Branch) Joint Ventures and Associated companies EDP Servicios Financieros España, S.A. Other EDP Group companies  Thousand Euros  EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A. EDP - Energias de Portugal, S.A. Sucursal en España (EDP Branch) Joint Ventures and Associated companies EDP Finance B.V. EDP Servicios Financieros España, S.A. Other EDP Group companies  Loans and interests to receive  1,099 55,498 56,597  Loans and interests to pay  25 1,397,550 1,220,062 2,617,637  Assets Others  Total  18,489 24,961 515 195,343 25,153 264,461  19,588 24,961 56,013 195,343 25,153 321,058  Liabilities Others  Total  29,092 676,006 57 308 5,941 711,404  29,117 676,006 57 1,397,858 1,220,062 5,941 3,329,041  As at 31 December 2015, assets and liabilities with related parties, are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros  EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A. Hidrocantábrico Group companies (electric sector) Joint Ventures and Associated companies EDP Servicios Financieros España, S.A. Other EDP Group companies  276  Loans and interests to receive  260 1 54,392 54,653  Assets Others  Total  27,909 19,550 662 138,201 27,221 213,543  28,169 19,551 55,054 138,201 27,221 268,196  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  64   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR EDPR 2016 2016 ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016  Thousand Euros Euros Thousand  Loans and Loans and interests interests to pay to pay  EDP EnergiasEnergias de Portugal, S.A. EDP de Portugal, S.A. EDP - EnergiasEnergias de Portugal, S.A. Sucursal en (EDP Branch) Branch) EDP - de Portugal, S.A. Sucursal en España España (EDP Hidrocantábrico Group companies (electric (electric sector) Hidrocantábrico Group companies sector) Joint Ventures and Associated companies Joint Ventures and Associated companies EDP Finance B.V. EDP Finance B.V. EDP Servicios Financieros España, España, S.A. EDP Servicios Financieros S.A. Other EDP Group companies Other EDP Group companies  550 550 20 20 1,687,543 1,687,543 1,450,281 1,450,281 11 11 3,138,405 3,138,405  Liabilities Liabilities Others Others  Total Total  4,249 4,249 607,226 607,226 718 718 45 45 715 715 6,754 6,754 2,066 2,066 621,773 621,773  4,799 4,799 607,226 607,226 738 738 45 45 1,688,258 1,688,258 1,457,035 1,457,035 2,077 2,077 3,760,178 3,760,178  Assets Assets as at December 31, 2016 include the balance currentcurrent account with EDP Servicios Financieros España S.A. as at December 31, 2016 include the balance of the of the account with EDP Servicios Financieros España S.A. amounting to 195,343 thousand Euros in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract signed signed between the parties amounting to 195,343 thousand Euros in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract between the parties on June 1,June 1, 2015 (see note 24). on 2015 (see note 24). Liabilities includes essentially loans obtained by EDPby EDP Renováveis from EDP Financethe amount of 1,397,195 thousand Liabilities includes essentially loans obtained Renováveis from EDP Finance BV in BV in the amount of 1,397,195 thousand Euros (31 December 2015: 1,687,058 thousand Euros) Euros) and from EDP Servicios Financieros España S.A.amount of Euros (31 December 2015: 1,687,058 thousand and from EDP Servicios Financieros España S.A. in the in the amount of 1,219,868 thousand Euros (31 December 2015: 1,450,000 thousand Euros).Euros). 1,219,868 thousand Euros (31 December 2015: 1,450,000 thousand With the purpose of hedging the foreignforeign exchange EDP of EDP Renováveis and EDP Branch, the EDP establishing a Cross- CrossWith the purpose of hedging the exchange risk of risk Renováveis and EDP Branch, the EDP Group Group establishing a Currency Interest Rate Swap (CIRS) (CIRS) in USD and EUR between EDP Branch and EDP Renováveis. At each reporting date, this Currency Interest Rate Swap in USD and EUR between EDP Branch and EDP Renováveis. At each reporting date, this CIRS isCIRS is revalued to its market which corresponds to a spot foreign foreign exchange revaluation, resulting in a perfect hedge revalued to its market value, value, which corresponds to a spot exchange revaluation, resulting in a perfect hedge (revaluation of the investment in EPDR NA andNA the USD external financing). As at 31 December 2016, the amount payable by (revaluation of the investment in EPDR of and of the USD external financing). As at 31 December 2016, the amount payable by EDP Renováveis to EDP to EDP Branch related to this CIRS amounts to 668,047 thousand(31 December 2015: 589,036 EDP Renováveis Branch related to this CIRS amounts to 668,047 thousand Euros Euros (31 December 2015: 589,036 thousand Euros) Euros) (see33 and 33 and 35). thousand (see notes notes 35). Transactions with relatedrelated parties for the year 31 December 2016 are analysed as follows: Transactions with parties for the year ended ended 31 December 2016 are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros Euros Thousand  Operating Operating IncomeIncome  EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A.  Financial Financial IncomeIncome  72 26,433  - 13,440  26,433  EDP EnergiasEnergias de Portugal, S.A. EDP de Portugal, S.A. Sucursal en España (EDP Branch) EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A. Sucursal Hidrocantábrico Group companies (electric sector) en España (EDP Branch) Joint Ventures and Associated companies (electric sector) Hidrocantábrico Group companies EDP Serviço Universal, S.A. Associated companies Joint Ventures and  -  72  13,440  -  -  -  1,199  -  3,358  -  1,199  31 268,279  Other EDP Group companies EDP Serviço Universal, S.A.  3,358 268,279  92,633  -  Operating Operating Financial Financial Expenses Expenses Expenses Expenses -1,718  -31,410  -11,713 -1,718  -120,208 -31,410  -11,713  -120,208 -683  -1,210  -90 -1,210 -4 -90 -3,907  -683  -  -  -133,503  31  107,272 92,633  18,642 -3,907  285,804 -133,503  298,173  107,272  18,642  285,804  298,173  Other EDP Group companies  -4  -  Operating income includes mainly the electricity sales to EDP Serviço Universal, S.A. which is a supplier of last resource in Portugal due to regulatory legislation. In 2015 it also included electricity sales to HC Group that acted as a commercialresource in Operating income includes mainly the electricity sales to EDP Serviço Universal, S.A. which is a supplier of last agent of subsidiaries of EDPRto regulatory legislation. In 2015 it also included electricityonwards, HC Group that acted as a subsidiaries of Portugal due Group in Spain until December 2015. From January 2016 sales to the commercial agent of commercial agent of EDPR Group in Spain is the AXPO Group. until December 2015. From January 2016 onwards, the commercial agent of subsidiaries of subsidiaries of EDPR Group in Spain EDPR Group in Spain is the AXPO Group. Financial income and Financial expenses with EDP, S.A. are mainly related to derivative financial instruments. Financial income and Financial expenses with EDP, S.A. are mainly related to derivative financial instruments. Transactions with related parties for the year ended 31 December 2015 are analysed as follows: Transactions with related parties for the year ended 31 December 2015 are analysed as follows: Thousand Euros Operating Financial Operating Financial Income Income Expenses Thousand Euros Operating Financial Operating Expenses Financial Income Income Expenses Expenses EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A. 10,538 -10,557 -19,900 EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A. Sucursal en España (EDP EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A. Branch) EDP Energias de Portugal, S.A. Sucursal en España (EDP Hidrocantábrico Group companies (electric sector) Branch) Joint Ventures and Associated companies Hidrocantábrico Group companies (electric sector) EDP Serviço Universal, S.A. Joint Ventures and Associated companies Other EDP Group companies EDP Serviço Universal, S.A. Other EDP Group companies  -  -  350,091 4,827 350,091 189,096 4,827 18 189,096 544,032 18 544,032  -  10,538 -  17,156 2,202 29,896  17,156 2,202 29,896  -10,418  -10,557 -10,418  -4,031 -35 -4,031 -40 -35 -3,971 -40 -29,052 -3,971 -29,052  -22,041  -19,900 -22,041 -1,073 -1,073 -146,076 -189,090 -146,076 -189,090  As part of its operational activities, the EDP Renováveis Group must present guarantees in favor of certain suppliers and in connection with renewable energy contracts. As at Renováveis Group must present guaranteesBrasil and Hidrocantábrico and in As part of its operational activities, the EDP 31 December 2016, EDP, S.A., Energias do in favor of certain suppliers granted financial (101,306 thousands of Euros, 31 December December 2016, EDP, S.A., Energias dooperational Hidrocantábrico connection with renewable energy contracts. As at 31 2015: 40,019 thousands of Euros) and Brasil and (276,236 thousands of Euros, 31 December thousands of Euros, 31 December 2015: 40,019 to suppliersof Euros) andEDPR EU and(276,236 granted financial (101,306 2015: 293,314 thousands of Euros) guarantees thousands in favour of operational EDPR NA. The operational guarantees are issued following the commitments Euros) guarantees EU suppliers inNA in relation to EU and EDPR thousands of Euros, 31 December 2015: 293,314 thousands of assumed by EDPR to and EDPR favour of EDPR the acquisition The operational guarantees are issued following the commitments assumed contracts EU and EDPR NA in relation to the NA. of property, plant and equipment, supply agreements, turbines and energy by EDPR (power purchase agreements) (see note 36). acquisition of property, plant and equipment, supply agreements, turbines and energy contracts (power purchase agreements) (see note 36).  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Accounts for the years ended ended 31 December 2016 and Notes to the Consolidated Annual Annual Accounts for the years 31 December 2016 and 2015 2015  277 65 65 277   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  38. Fair value of financial assets and liabilities Fair value of financial instruments is based, whenever available, on quoted market prices. Otherwise, fair value is determined through internal models, which are based on generally accepted cash flow discounting techniques and option valuation models or through quotations supplied by third parties. Non-standard instruments may require alternative techniques, which consider their characteristics and the generally accepted market practices applicable to such instruments. These models are developed considering the market variables that affect the underlying instrument, namely yield curves, exchange rates and volatility factors.  As at 31 December 2016 and 2015, the following table presents the interest rate curves of the major currencies to which the Group is exposed. These interest rates were used as the base for the fair value calculations made through internal models referred above:  3 months 6 months 9 months 1 year 2 years 3 years 5 years 7 years 10 years  -  EUR  31 Dec 2016 Currencies  . . . . . . . . .  USD  . . . . . . . . .  31 Dec 2015 Currencies EUR  - . - .  . . - . . . . .  USD  . . . . . . . . .  Non-listed equity instruments, for which a reliable and consistent fair value estimate is not available either by internal models or Available-for-sale financial instruments and financial assets at fair value through profit or loss. value estimates are not available, are recorded in the statement of financial position at their cost. Cash and cash equivalents, trade receivables and suppliers. These financial instruments include mainly short term financial assets and liabilities. Given their short term nature at the reporting date, their book values are not significantly different from their fair values. Financial debt The fair value of the financial debt is estimated through internal models, which are based on generally accepted cash flow discounting techniques. At the reporting date, the carrying amount of floating rate loans is approximately their fair value. In case of fixed rate loans, mainly the intercompany loans granted by EDP Group, their fair value is obtained through internal models based on generally accepted discounting techniques. Derivative financial instruments used. For over-the-counter derivatives, fair value is estimated through the use of internal models based on cash flow discounting techniques and option valuation models generally accepted by the market, or by dealer price quotations. CIRS with EDP Branch (note 35) CIRS in USD and EUR with EDP Branch. This financial derivative is presented in the statement of financial position at its fair value, which is estimated by discounting the projected USD and EUR cash flows. The discount rates and forward interest rates were based on the interest rate curves referred to above and the USD/EUR exchange rate is disclosed on note 27. See also note 33.  278  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  6   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  The fair values of assets and liabilities as at 31 December 2016 and 31 December 2015 are analysed as follows:  Thousand Euros  31 December 2016 Carrying amount  Financial assets Available-for-sale investments  31 December 2015  Fair value  Difference  Carrying amount  Fair value  Difference  8,187  8,187  -  6,257  6,257  -  Debtors and other assets from commercial activities Other debtors and other assets  364,075  364,075  -  299,531  299,531  -  107,270  107,270  -  86,416  86,416  -  Derivative financial instruments  55,066  55,066  -  55,272  55,272  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss Cash and cash equivalents  603,219  603,219  -  436,732  436,732  -  1,137,817  1,137,817  -  884,208  884,208  -  3,406,069  3,440,235  34,166  4,220,270  4,273,825  53,555  748,613  748,613  -  725,638  725,638  -  2,339,425  2,339,425  -  1,956,217  1,956,217  -  98,525  98,525  -  92,262  92,262  -  642,527  642,527  -  235,126  235,126  -  771,167  771,167  -  679,161  679,161  -  8,006,326  8,040,492  34,166  7,908,674  7,962,229  53,555  Financial liabilities Financial debt Suppliers Institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms Trade and other payables from commercial activities Other liabilities and other payables Derivative financial instruments  The fair value levels used to valuate EDP Renováveis Group financial assets and liabilities are defined as follows: - Level 1 - Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active market for identical assets and liabilities; - Level 2 - Inputs other that quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly (i.e. as prices) or indirectly (i.e., derived from prices); - Level 3 - Inputs for the assets or liability that are not based on observable market data (unobservable inputs). Thousand Euros Level 1  31 December 2016 Level 2  Level 3  Level 1  31 December 2015 Level 2  Level 3  Financial assets Available-for-sale investments  -  -  8,186  -  -  Derivative financial instruments  -  55,066  -  -  55,272  6,257 -  -  55,066  8,186  -  55,272  6,257  -  -  4,694  -  -  344  Financial liabilities Liabilities arising from options with non-controlling interests Derivative financial instruments  -  771,167  -  -  679,161  -  -  771,167  4,694  -  679,161  344  The remaining assets and liabilities are valuated within Level 1 or correspond to assets and liabilities which fair value is the same as its carrying amount. In 2016, there are no transfers between levels. The movement in 2016 and 2015 of the financial assets and liabilities within Level 3 are analysed was as follows:  Balance at the beginning of the year Gains / (Losses) in other comprehensive income Purchases Fair value changes/Payments Disposals Exchange rates Balance at the end of the year  Available For sale investments 31 Dec 2016 31 Dec 2015 6,257 1,929 8,186  6,336 430 4 -513 6,257  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Trade And other payables 31 Dec 2016 31 Dec 2015 344 4,358 -8 4,694  12,760 -62 -12,354 344  279 67   ENERGY AS THE NEWART ENERGY AS THE NEWART  The Trade and other payables within level 3 are related to Liabilities with non-controlling interests. The movements in 2016 and 2015 of the derivative financial instruments are presented in note 35.  39. Relevant and subsequent events EDPR announces the sale of a minority stake in Portuguese assets to CTG EDPR through its subsidiary EDP Renewables Europe, S.L. (“EDPR Europe”), entered in February 2017 into an agreement with ACE Portugal Sàrl which is 100% owned by ACE Investment Fund II LP – an entity participated of China Three Gorges Hong Kong Ltd (“CTG HK”), a fully-owned subsidiary of China Three Gorges (“CTG”) – to sell 49% of equity shareholding and shareholder loans in a portfolio of wind assets for a total consideration of 242 million Euros. The transaction scope covers 422 MW of wind technology, located in Portugal, with an average age of 6 years. These assets were part of ENEOP project and have been fully consolidated at EDPR following the conclusion of the asset split process in 2015. Ordinances 268-B/2016 and 69/2017 The Portuguese Government through the Direcção-Geral de Energia e Geologia (DGEG) performed an investigation for the evaluation of public policies regarding the energy sector, in which it has come to the conclusion that the renewable energy generators with feed-in tariff have received, apart from this tariff incentive, public support for the promoting and development of renewable energy. DGEG's investigation estimated an amount of 140 million Euros as an excess over what they should have received. On 13 October 2016, Ordinance 268-B/2016 was published, determining the recovery to SEN of the amount allegedly received in excess, through feed-in tariff reduction granted by the Last resource supplier (CUR). On 28 December 2016, Law 46/2016 was published. The article 171, determined that the public support for the promoting and development of renewable energy received by the eligible energy generators with feed-in tariff (at this date) should not be cumulative with the administratively fixed remuneration received by those generators. In this sense, this article determines the adoption, through an ordinance, of a mechanism for deduction or replacement of the public support received under these conditions. Thus, in 16 February 2017, Ordinance 69/2017 was published which determining the recovery to SEN of the amount allegedly received in excess, through feed-in tariff reduction granted by the CUR. This ordinance replicate the content of the Ordinance 268-B/2016 repealing it. The publishing of orders from the State member responsible for the energy sector is expected, that will identify the producers and the amounts which one of them shouldn't have received, in order to calculate the new feed-in tariff that allows this amount to be recovered as fast as it is possible. For Renewable energy generators under this situation, which have already lost their right to feed-in tariffs, it establishes that it is the CUR who has the responsibility to recover the amounts identified by DGEG, though it is not clear in what way will they recover these amounts. Half of the amount recovered under this mechanism will reduce tariff deficit, being the other half allocated to future yearly tariffs. EDPR awarded long term contracts for 127 MW at the Italian wind auction EDPR was awarded 20-year long term contracts at the Italian wind auction to sell electricity to be produced by 6 wind farms with a total capacity of 127 MW. The wind farm projects are located in the south of Italy, with installation expected to occur in 2018. EDPR concludes the sale of minority stakes in Poland and Italy EDPR through its subsidiaries EDP Renewables Europe, S.L. and EDPR Polska S.P. zo.o. has concluded the sale of 49% equity shareholding and shareholder loans in a portfolio of wind assets with 548 MW of capacity in Poland and Italy, to ACE Poland S.A.R.L. and ACE Italy S.A.R.L., both of which 100% owned by ACE Investment Fund LP – an entity participated of China Three Gorges Hong Kong Ltd (“CTG HK”), a fully-owned subsidiary of China Three Gorges (“CTG”). Transaction final consideration reached 363 million of Euros. EDPR established new institutional partnership structure for 328 MW and 101 MW in the US EDPR through its fully owned subsidiary EDP Renewables North America LLC, has secured 343 million of Dollars of institutional equity financing from two major financial institutions, in exchange for an interest in the 250 MW Hidalgo wind farm project, located in the State of Texas, and for an interest in the 78 MW Jericho Rise wind project, located in the State of New York. Both projects have previously secured long-term sales agreements. Under the agreement, funding has taken place close to the start of operations of both projects, on the last quarter of 2016. Additionally, EDPR has closed 114 million of Dollars of institutional equity financing from MUFG and another institutional investor, in exchange for an interest in the 101 MW Amazon Wind Farm US Central project (Timber Road III). The project is located in the state of Ohio and has previously secured a long-term Power Purchase Agreement (“PPA”) with Amazon Web Services, Inc. (“AWS”), an Amazon.com company.  280  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  68   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR ANNUAL EDPR 20162016 REPORT EDPR 2016  EDPR secures PPA for new 200 MW and 75 MW wind farms farms in the United States EDPR secures PPA for new 200 MW and 75 MW wind in the United States EDPR through its fully ownedowned subsidiary EDP Renewable North America LLC, signed 15-year and 20-year Power Purchase EDPR through its fully subsidiary EDP Renewable North America LLC, signed 15-year and 20-year Power Purchase Agreements (“PPA”) to sell to sell the energy produced by a 200 MWfarm in the in the of Iowa and by a 75 MW wind farm in the in the Agreements (“PPA”) the energy produced by a 200 MW wind wind farm state state of Iowa and by a 75 MW wind farm state of Indiana, both with start of operations expected for 2018. 2018. state of Indiana, both with start of operations expected for EDPR closed an asset rotation transaction in Europe, for a total consideration of €550 million EDPR through its subsidiary rotation transaction in Europe,entered in April 2016 intoof €550 million with Vortex, a fund led by EDPR closed an asset EDP Renewables Europe, S.L. for a total consideration an agreement EFG Hermes which includes investments from the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, to sell a 49% equity shareholding EDPR through its subsidiary EDP Renewables fully-owned entered in April 2016 into an Portugal, with Vortex, a fund led and outstanding shareholders loans in a portfolio of Europe, S.L. wind onshore assets in Spain,agreementBelgium and France for by a totalEFG Hermes which includes investments from the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries, to sell a 49% equity shareholding consideration of 550 million of Euros. and outstanding shareholders loans in a portfolio of fully-owned wind onshore assets in Spain, Portugal, Belgium and France for The portfolio totals 664 MWof 550 million of Euros. a total consideration and has 4 years of average life. In detail, the transaction scope covers 348 MW in operation in Spain (with 6 years of average life), 191 MW in operation in Portugal (part of ex-ENEOP assets), 71 MW in operation in Belgium The portfolio totals closing and has 4 years of average place detail, 2016. and 54 MW in France. The664 MW of this transaction has takenlife. In in Junethe transaction scope covers 348 MW in operation in Spain (with 6 years of average life), 191 MW in operation in Portugal (part of ex-ENEOP assets), 71 MW in operation in Belgium and 54 MW in France. The closing of this transaction has taken place in June 2016.  40. Recent accounting standards and interpretations used Standards, amendments and interpretations issued effective for the Group 40. Recent accounting standards and interpretations  used  The new standards and interpretations that has been issued and are already effective and that the EDPR Group has applied on Standards, amendments and interpretations issued effective for the Group its consolidated financial statements with no significant impact are the following: The new standards and interpretations that has been issued and are already effective and that the EDPR Group has applied on • IFRSits consolidated financial statements with IASsignificant impact Investment Entities: Applying the Consolidation Exception; 10 (Amended), IFRS 12 (Amended) and no 28 (Amended) - are the following: • IFRS•11 (Amended) - Accounting12 (Amended) and Interests in Joint Operations; IFRS 10 (Amended), IFRS for Acquisitions of IAS 28 (Amended) - Investment Entities: Applying the Consolidation Exception; • IAS 1 (Amended) - Disclosure Initiative;for Acquisitions of Interests in Joint Operations; • IFRS 11 (Amended) - Accounting • IAS 16 (Amended) and IAS 38 (Amended) - Clarification of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation; • IAS 1 (Amended) - Disclosure Initiative; • Annual Improvement Project (2010-2012); • IAS 16 (Amended) and IAS 38 (Amended) - Clarification of Acceptable Methods of Depreciation and Amortisation; • Annual Improvement Project (2012-2014). • Annual Improvement Project (2010-2012); Standards, amendments and interpretations issued but not yet effective for the Group • Annual Improvement Project (2012-2014). The standards, amendments and interpretations issued but not yet effective for the Group, which impact is being evaluated, are Standards, amendments and interpretations issued but not yet effective for the Group the following: The standards, amendments and interpretations issued but not yet effective for the Group, which impact is being evaluated, are • IFRSthe-following: Instruments 9 Financial The InternationalFinancial Instruments Board (IASB), issued in November 2009, IFRS 9 - Financial instruments part I: ● IFRS 9 - Accounting Standards Classification and measurement, with effective date of mandatory application for periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018, The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), issued in November 2009, IFRS 9 - Financial instruments part I: being allowed its early adoption. Classification and measurement, with effective date of mandatory application for periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018, This standard is included in the IASB's comprehensive project to replace IAS 39 and relates to issues of classification and being allowed its early adoption. measurement of financial assets. The main issues considered are as follows: This standard is included in the IASB's comprehensive project to replace IAS 39 and relates to issues of classification and - the financial assetsof financial assets. The main issues considered are as follows: value. This decision will be made upon the measurement can be classified in two categories: at amortised cost or at fair initial recognition of the financial assets. Its classification depends on how the entity presents these financial assets and the - the cash flows associated classified in two categories: at amortised cost or at fair value. This decision will be made upon the contractual financial assets can beto each financial asset in the business; initial recognition of the financial assets. Its classification depends on how the entity presents these financial assets and the - debt contractual cash flowsbe measured at amortised cost when the business; cash-flows represent only principal and instruments can only associated to each financial asset in the contractual interest payments, which means that it contains only basic loan features, and for which an entity holds the asset to collect the - debt instruments the other debt instruments are recognised at the contractual cash-flows represent only principal and contractual cash flows. Allcan only be measured at amortised cost when fair value; interest payments, which means that it contains only basic loan features, and for which an entity holds the asset to collect the - equity instruments issued by third parties are recognised at fair value withat fair value; changes recognised in the profit and contractual cash flows. All the other debt instruments are recognised subsequent loss. However an entity could irrevocably select equity instruments at initial recognition for which fair value changes and the - gain or loss are recognised in fair parties are recognised at losses recognised in fair value reserves cannot be recycled realised equity instruments issued by third value reserves. Gains andfair value with subsequent changes recognised in the profit and loss. However an entity could irrevocably select does not imply that all the recognition for which fair value changes and to profit and loss. This is a discretionary decision, and equity instruments at initialequity instruments should be treated on this the basis. realised gain or loss areare recognisedfair income for the year; and losses recognised in fair value reserves cannot be recycled The dividends received recognised in as value reserves. Gains to profit and loss. This is a discretionary decision, and does not imply that all the equity instruments should be treated on this - the exemption that allowsreceived are recognised as income for the year; basis. The dividends unquoted equity investments and related derivatives to be measured at cost, under IAS 39, is not allowed under IFRS 9; and - the exemption that allows unquoted equity investments and related derivatives to be measured at cost, under IAS 39, is not - changes in fair value attributable to own credit risk of financial liabilities classified as fair value through profit or loss, shall be allowed under IFRS 9; and recognised in Other comprehensive income. The remaining fair value changes related to these financial liabilities shall be - changes in profit or attributable to own credit risk of financial liabilities classified as fair value reclassified/transferred recognised throughfair value loss. The amounts recognised in Other comprehensive income shall not bethrough profit or loss, shall be recognised to profit and loss. in Other comprehensive income. The remaining fair value changes related to these financial liabilities shall be recognised through profit or loss. The amounts recognised in Other comprehensive income shall not be reclassified/transferred to profit and loss.  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  281 69 69 281   ENERGY ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  ● IFRS 15 - Revenue from the Contracts with Customers The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), issued in May 2014, IFRS 15 - Revenue from the Contracts with Customers, with effective date of mandatory application for periods beginning on or after 1 January 2018, being allowed its early adoption. This standard has not yet been adopted by the European Union. This new standard presents the principles that shall be applied by an entity in order to provide more useful information to users of financial statements about the nature, amount, term and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from a contract with a client. The core principle of IFRS 15 is that an entity recognises revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services, as provided in the 5 steps methodology. The 5 steps methodology consists in the following steps: (i) identify the contract with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to performance obligations; and (v) recognise revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. ● IFRS 16 – Leases The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) issued, in January 2016, IFRS 16 - Leases, with effective date of mandatory application for periods beginning on or after 1 January 2019, with earlier adoption permitted for entities that have also adopted IFRS 15 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers. This standard has not yet been adopted by the European Union. This standard sets out the principles for the recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure of leases, and supersedes IAS 17 - Leases and its associated interpretative guidance. The objective is to ensure that lessees and lessors provide relevant information to the users of financial statements, namely about the effect that leases have on the financial position, financial performance and cash flows of the entity. The main issues considered are as follows: - inclusion of some considerations in order to distinguish leases from service contracts, based on the existence of control of the underlying asset at the time that it is available for use by the lessee; and - introduction of a single lessee accounting model that requires a lessee to recognise assets and liabilities for all leases with a term of more than 12 months, unless the underlying asset is of low value. A lessee is required to recognise a right-of-use asset representing its right to use the underlying leased asset and a lease liability representing its obligation to make lease payments. As a consequence, a lessee recognises depreciation costs and interest costs separately. ● IAS 7 (Amended) - Disclosure Initiative The International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) issued, in January 2016, amendments to IAS 7 - Statement of Cash Flows, with effective date of mandatory application for periods beginning on or after 1 January 2017, being allowed its early adoption. This standard has not yet been adopted by the European Union. These amendments require an entity to provide disclosures that enable users of financial statements to evaluate changes in liabilities arising from financing activities, including both changes arising from cash flows and non-cash changes, such as: - Changes from financing cash flows; - Changes arising from obtaining or losing control of subsidiaries or other businesses; - The effect of changes in foreign exchange rates; or - Changes in fair values. These disclosures may be presented by providing a reconciliation between the opening and closing balances in the statement of financial position for liabilities arising from financing activities.  The standards, amendments and interpretations issued but not yet effective for the Group with no significant impact are the following: ● IFRS 4 (Amended) - Applying IFRS 9 - Financial Instruments with IFRS 4 - Insurance Contracts; ● IFRS 14 - Regulatory Deferral Accounts; ● IAS 12 (Amended) - Recognition of Deferred Tax Assets for Unrealised Losses; ● IFRIC 22 - Foreign Currency Transactions and Advance Payments; ● Annual Improvement Project (2014-2016).  282  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  70   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL EDPR EDPR 2016 REPORT 2016 EDPR 2016  41. Environment issues 41. Environment issues Expenses of environmental nature nature are the expenses that were identified and incurred to reduce reduce or damages of an of an Expenses of environmental are the expenses that were identified and incurred to avoid, avoid, or repair repair damages environmental nature nature that from the Group's normalnormal activity. environmental that result result from the Group's activity. These expenses are bookedbooked incomeincome statement year, except except if they qualifyrecognised as an asset, according These expenses are in the in the statement of the of the year, if they qualify to be to be recognised as an asset, according to IAS to IAS 16. 16. During During thethe environmental expenses recognised in the incomeincome statement amount of 3,721 thousand Euros (31 the year, year, the environmental expenses recognised in the statement in the in the amount of 3,721 thousand Euros (31 December 2015: 3,467 thousand Euros) Euros) refer towith the environmental management plan. plan. December 2015: 3,467 thousand refer to costs costs with the environmental management As referred in accounting policy 2o), the Group has established provisions for dismantling and decommissioning of property, As referred in accounting policy 2o), the Group has established provisions for dismantling and decommissioning of property, plant and equipment when awhen a legal or contractual obligation to dismantle and decommission those assets assets end of end of plant and equipment legal or contractual obligation exists exists to dismantle and decommission those at the at the their useful lives. Consequently, the Group has bookedbooked provisions for property, plant and equipment related to electricity wind their useful lives. Consequently, the Group has provisions for property, plant and equipment related to electricity wind generation for the for the responsibilities of restoring sites and landoriginal condition, in the amount of 268,191 thousand Euros Euros generation responsibilities of restoring sites and land to its to its original condition, in the amount of 268,191 thousand as at 31 December 2016 (31 December 2015: 117,228 thousand Euros) Euros) (see note 30). as at 31 December 2016 (31 December 2015: 117,228 thousand (see note 30).  42. Business combinations 42. Business combinations During During EDPR Group acquired 100% of the Italian Italian companyEólico Banzi S.r.l. for a total a total amount of 44,570 thousand 2016, 2016, EDPR Group acquired 100% of the company Parco Parco Eólico Banzi S.r.l. for amount of 44,570 thousand Euros of which an amount of 10,82010,820 thousand has been paid in paid inand the remaining amount, 33,75033,750 thousand Euros, Euros of which an amount of thousand Euros Euros has been 2016 2016 and the remaining amount, thousand Euros, was transferred on previous years as advances for the for the acquisition. acquisition date, EDPR Group has determined the fairthe fair was transferred on previous years as advances acquisition. At the At the acquisition date, EDPR Group has determined value of the assets assets acquired and liabilities assumed, on a valuation performed by an independent third party. party. value of the acquired and liabilities assumed, based based on a valuation performed by an independent third Fair value of identifiable assets assets and liabilities acquisition date is date is presented as follows: Fair value of identifiable and liabilities at the at the acquisition presented as follows: Book value at Book value at acquisition date date acquisition  Thousand Euros Euros Thousand Property, plant and equipment Property, plant and equipment Intangible assets assets Intangible GoodwillGoodwill Deferred tax assets assets Deferred tax Other debtors debtors and other assets Other and other assets Cash and cash equivalentes Cash and cash equivalentes Total Assets Assets Total Provisions Provisions Deferred tax liabilities Deferred tax liabilities Other liabilities and other payables Other liabilities and other payables Total Liabilities Total Liabilities  Fair Value Value Fair value at Fair Fair value at adjustment adjustment acquisition date date acquisition  38,767 38,767 23 23 5,587 5,587 1,818 1,818 2,166 2,166 48,361 48,361 48 703 751  1,764 1,764  1,764 1,764  47,610 47,610  Net Assets acquiredacquired Net Assets  48 703 751  7,351 7,351 -5,587 -5,587 1,764 1,764  -  -  Total consideration transferred for the acquisition Total consideration transferred for the acquisition Gain on Gain on acquisition acquisition  46,118 46,118 23 23 1,818 1,818 2,166 2,166 50,125 50,125 48 1,764 703 2,515  47,610 47,610 -44,570 -44,570 3,040  Acquisition cash flow Acquisition cash flow - Cash and cash equivalents of Banzi of Banzi - Cash and cash equivalents - Total consideration transferred for the acquisition - Total consideration transferred for the acquisition Net cash outflow outflow Net cash  48 1,764 703 2,515  3,040  2,166 2,166 -44,570 -44,570 42,404 42,404  The above valuation has determined a fair value for Property, plant and equipment in the amount of 46,11846,118 thousand Euros, The above valuation has determined a fair value for Property, plant and equipment in the amount of thousand Euros, generating a net fairnet fairadjustment of 1,764 thousand Euros. Euros. generating a value value adjustment of 1,764 thousand During During EDPR acquired a 100% stake in ENEOP. Since the Group alreadyalready 35,95% stake in ENEOP, it was treatedtreated as 2015, 2015, EDPR acquired a 100% stake in ENEOP. Since the Group held a held a 35,95% stake in ENEOP, it was as a step acquisition under IFRS 3. Fair 3. Fairof net assets assets acquired amounted to 230,791 thousand being the consideration a step acquisition under IFRS value value of net acquired amounted to 230,791 thousand Euros Euros being the consideration paid 50,49750,497 thousand Euros, resulting in a control acquisition gain of 124,750 thousand Euros. paid thousand Euros, resulting in a control acquisition gain of 124,750 thousand Euros. During Duringthe EDPR Group has paid an amount of 52,75152,751 thousand (31 December 2015: 159,318 thousand Euros) Euros) with 2016 2016 the EDPR Group has paid an amount of thousand Euros Euros (31 December 2015: 159,318 thousand with the following breakdown (see note 5): the following breakdown (see note 5): -  Final payment in relation to the acquisition of the company Parco Eólico Banzi S.r.l.: 10,82010,820 thousand referred Final payment in relation to the acquisition of the company Parco Eólico Banzi S.r.l.: thousand Euros Euros referred above. above. Acquisition of non-controlling interests: 37,21437,214 thousand which includes 12,09012,090 thousand and 22,27922,279 Acquisition of non-controlling interests: thousand Euros Euros which includes thousand Euros Euros and thousand Euros corresponding to the acquisition of non-controlling interests in EDPR Polska Polska andUK respectively. thousand Euros corresponding to the acquisition of non-controlling interests in EDPR and EDPR EDPR UK respectively. CapitalCapital contributions in companies consolidated equity equity method: thousand Euros relatedrelated Mexican contributions in companies consolidated under under method: 3,260 3,260 thousand Euros to the to the Mexican company Eólica de Coahuila S.A. deS.A. de C.V. company Eólica de Coahuila C.V. Acquisition of companies and success fees: 1,458 thousand Euros Euros Acquisition of companies and success fees: 1,458 thousand  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  283 71  283  71   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  goodwill recognition of 848 thousand Euro.  43. Operating segments report platforms, Europe, North America and Brazil. The strategic business units have operations in different geographic zones and are  The accounting policies of the reportable segments are the same as described in note 3. Information regarding the results of internal management reports that are reviewed by the Management. Segment operating profit is used to measure performance as management believes that such information is the most relevant in evaluating the results of certain segments relative to A business segment is an identifiable component of the Group, aimed at providing a single product or service, or a group of segments. The Group generates energy from renewable sources in several locations and its activity is managed based on the following business segments: •  Europe: refers to EDPR EU Group companies operating in Spain, Portugal, Belgium, France, Italy, Netherlands, Poland,  •  North America: refers to EDPR NA and EDPR Canada Group companies that operate in United States of America and  •  Brazil: refers to EDPR Brasil Group companies that operate in this country.  Segment definition The amounts reported in each business segment result from the aggregation of the subsidiaries and business units defined in  adjustment.  KPMG has audited the consolidated annual accounts of EDP Renováveis Group for 2016 and 2015. This company and the other  Thousand Euros Audit and statutory audit of accounts Other audit services  Other services  Thousand Euros Audit and statutory audit of accounts Other audit services  Other services  284  Europe  1,477 193 1,670  North America  1,161 7 1,168  Brazil  126 126  88 88  Europe  1,894 453 2,347 356 265 621  31 December 2016 Total  2,764 200 2,964 88 88  North America  Brazil  1,131  105  1,131  116 1 117  105  31 December 2015 Total  3,130 453 3,583 472 266 738  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  7   CONSOLIDATED ANNUAL ANNUAL REPORT ACCOUNTS 2016 EDPR 2016  Annex 1 The Subsidiary Companies consolidated under the full consolidated method, as at 31 December 2016 and 2015, are as follows: 2016  2015  Head Company  Auditor  % of capital  % of voting rights  Oviedo  KPMG  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  Oviedo  KPMG  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  Office  GROUP'S PARENT HOLDING COMPANY AND RELATED ACTIVITIES: EDP Renováveis, S.A. (Group's parent holding company) EDP Renováveis Servicios Financieros, S.L.  % of capital  % of voting rights  EUROPE GEOGRAPHY / PLATFORM: Spain: EDP Renewables Europe, S.L. (Europe Parent Company) Acampo Arias, S.L. Aplicaciones Industriales de Energías Limpias, S.L. Aprofitament D'Energies Renovables de la Terra Alta, S.A. Bon Vent de Corbera, S.L. Bon Vent de L'Ebre, S.L. Bon Vent de Vilalba, S.L. Compañía Eólica Campo de Borja, S.A. Desarrollos Catalanes Del Viento, S.L. Desarrollos Eólicos Almarchal, S.A.U. Desarrollos Eólicos Buenavista, S.A.U. Desarrollos Eólicos de Corme, S.A. Desarrollos Eólicos de Galicia, S.A. Desarrollos Eólicos de Lugo, S.A.U. Desarrollos Eólicos de Tarifa, S.A.U. Desarrollos Eólicos de Teruel, S.L. Desarrollos Eólicos Dumbria, S.A.U. Desarrollos Eólicos Rabosera, S.A. EDP Renovables España, S. L. EDP Renováveis Cantabria, S.L. EDPR Participaciones, S.L.U. EDPR Yield Spain Services, S.L.U. EDPR Yield, S.A.U. Energías Eólicas de la Manchuela, S.L.U. Eólica Arlanzón, S.A. Eólica Campollano, S.A. Eólica Curiscao Pumar, S.A. Eólica de Radona, S.L.U. Eólica del Alfoz, S.L. Eólica Don Quijote, S.L. Eólica Dulcinea, S.L. Eólica Fontesilva, S.L. Eólica Garcimuñoz, S.L. Eólica Guadalteba, S.L. Eólica La Brújula, S.A. Eólica La Janda, S.L. Eólica La Navica, S.L. Eólica Muxía, S.L. Eólica Sierra de Avila, S.L. Iberia Aprovechamientos Eólicos, S.A.U. Investigación y Desarrollo de Energías Renovables IDER, S.L. Molino de Caragüeyes, S.L. Neo Energía Aragón, S.L. Parc Eòlic Coll de la Garganta, S.L. Parc Eòlic de Coll de Moro, S.L. Parc Eòlic de Torre Madrina, S.L. Parc Eòlic de Vilalba dels Arcs, S.L. Parc Eòlic Serra Voltorera, S.L. Parque Eólico Altos del Voltoya, S.A.  Oviedo  KPMG  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  Zaragoza  KPMG  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  Zaragoza  n.a.  61.50%  61.50%  61.50%  61.50%  Barcelona  n.a.  48.39%  60.09%  60.63%  60.63%  Barcelona Barcelona Barcelona Zaragoza Barcelona Cádiz  KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  Cádiz  KPMG  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  La Coruña La Coruña Lugo Cádiz Zaragoza La Coruña Huesca Madrid Madrid Oviedo Madrid Oviedo  KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG n.a. KPMG KPMG KPMG n.a. KPMG n.a. KPMG  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00%  Madrid  KPMG  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  Madrid Madrid Madrid Madrid Madrid Albacete Albacete La Coruña Madrid Sevilla Madrid Madrid Madrid La Coruña Madrid Zaragoza  KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG n.a. KPMG KPMG  77.50% 75.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 94.00%  77.50% 75.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 94.00%  77.50% 75.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 84.90% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 94.00%  77.50% 75.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 84.90% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 94.00%  León  KPMG  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  Zaragoza Madrid Barcelona Barcelona Barcelona Barcelona Barcelona Madrid  KPMG n.a. KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 92.50%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 92.50%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 92.50%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 92.50%  74  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  285   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  2016  2015  Head Company  Auditor  % of capital  % of voting rights  Zaragoza Zaragoza Zaragoza Huesca Burgos Oviedo Albacete Oviedo  KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG n.a.  100.00% 69.84% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 90.00% 100.00%  100.00% 69.84% 100.00% 83.96% 100.00% 100.00% 90.00% 100.00%  100.00% 69.84% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 90.00% 100.00%  100.00% 69.84% 100.00% 83.96% 100.00% 100.00% 90.00% 100.00%  Porto Porto Porto Porto Porto Arcos de Valdevez Vila Pouca de Aguiar Porto Boticas Porto Arganil Vila Pouca de Aguiar Porto Cinfães Boticas Porto Porto Miranda do Corvo Porto Vila Pouca de Aguiar Porto Porto Porto Porto Porto Porto Porto Braga  KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  KPMG  60.00%  30.60%  60.00%  30.60%  KPMG  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG  100.00% 50.10% 100.00% 100.00%  51.00% 22.55% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 50.10% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 25.55% 100.00% 100.00%  Office  Parque Eólico Belchite, S.L. Parque Eólico La Sotonera, S.L. Parque Eólico Los Cantales, S.L.U. Parque Eólico Santa Quiteria, S.L. Parques de Generación Eólica, S.L. Parques Eólicos del Cantábrico, S.A. Renovables Castilla La Mancha, S.A. South África Wind & Solar Power, S.L.U.  % of capital  % of voting rights  Portugal: EDP Renováveis Portugal, S.A. EDP Renewables SGPS, S.A. EDPR PT - Parques Eólicos, S.A. EDPR PT - Promoção e Operação, S.A. EDPR Yield Portugal Services, Unipessoal Lda. Eólica da Alagoa, S.A. Eólica da Coutada, S.A. Eólica Eólica Eólica Eólica  da Lajeira, S.A. da Serra das Alturas, S.A. da Terra do Mato, S.A. das Serras das Beiras, S.A.  Eólica de Montenegrelo, S.A. Eólica Eólica Eólica Eólica Eólica  do do do do do  Alto da Lagoa, S.A. Alto da Teixosa, S.A. Alto do Mourisco, S.A. Cachopo, S.A. Castelo, S.A.  Eólica do Espigão, S.A. Eólica do Velão, S.A. Eólica dos Altos dos Salgueiros-Guilhado, S.A. Gravitangle - Fotovoltaica Unipessoal, Lda. Malhadizes - Energia Eólica, S.A. Parque Eólico da Serra do Oeste, S.A. Parque Eólico de Torrinheiras, S.A. Parque Eólico do Cabeço Norte, S.A. Parque Eólico do Pinhal do Oeste, S.A. Parque Eólico do Planalto, S.A. Stirlingpower, Unipessoal Lda.  KPMG  50.10%  22.55%  50.10%  25.55%  KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  KPMG  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  KPMG  100.00%  51.00%  100.00%  100.00%  KPMG  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 100.00%  100.00% 51.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 100.00%  KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG n.a. KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 50.96% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 25.99% 26.01% 51.00% 26.01% 26.01% 26.01% 100.00% 100.00% 26.01% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00%  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 50.96% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00%  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 25.99% 26.01% 51.00% 26.01% 26.01% 26.01% 100.00% 100.00% 26.01% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00%  France: EDP Renewables France, S.A.S. EDPR France Holding, S.A.S. Bourbriac II, S.A.S. Centrale Eolienne Canet-Pont de Salars, S.A.S. Centrale Eolienne Gueltas Noyal-Pontivy, S.A.S. Centrale Eolienne Neo Truc de L'Homme, S.A.S. Centrale Eolienne Patay, S.A.S. Centrale Eolienne Saint Barnabé, S.A.S. Centrale Eolienne Segur, S.A.S. EDPR Yield France Services, S.A.S. Eolienne de Callengeville, S.A.S. Eolienne de Saugueuse, S.A.R.L. Eolienne D'Etalondes, S.A.R.L. Monts de la Madeleine Energie, S.A.S. Monts du Forez Energie, S.A.S. Neo Plouvien, S.A.S. Parc Éolien d’Escardes, S.A.S. Parc Éolien de Boqueho-Pouagat, S.A.S. Parc Éolien de Citernes, S.A.S. Parc Éolien de Dammarie, S.A.R.L. Parc Éolien de Flavin, S.A.S. Parc Éolien de Francourville, S.A.S Parc Éolien de la Champagne Berrichonne, S.A.R.L. Parc Eolien de La Hetroye, S.A.S. Parc Éolien de Louvières, S.A.S.  Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris París  n.a.  100.00%  100.00%  0.00%  0.00%  Paris Paris  KPMG KPMG  100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 0.00%  100.00% 0.00%  75  286  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015   CONSOLIDATED ANNUAL ANNUAL REPORT ACCOUNTS 2016 EDPR 2016  2016 Head Company  Office  Parc Eolien de Mancheville, S.A.R.L. Parc Eolien de Montagne Fayel, S.A.S. Parc Éolien de Preuseville, S.A.R.L. Parc Éolien de Prouville, S.A.S. Parc Eolien de Roman, S.A.R.L. Parc Éolien de Tarzy, S.A.R.L. Parc Eolien de Varimpre, S.A.S. Parc Eolien des Longs Champs, S.A.R.L. Parc Eolien des Vatines, S.A.S. Parc Eolien du Clos Bataille, S.A.S. SOCPE de la Mardelle, S.A.R.L. SOCPE de la Vallée du Moulin, S.A.R.L. SOCPE de Sauvageons, S.A.R.L. SOCPE des Quinze Mines, S.A.R.L. SOCPE Le Mee, S.A.R.L. SOCPE Petite Pièce, S.A.R.L.  Paris Paris Paris París Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris Paris  2015  Auditor  % of capital  % of voting rights  n.a. KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG n.a. KPMG KPMG KPMG  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00%  100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 26.01% 100.00% 26.01% 26.01% 51.00%  % of capital  % of voting rights  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 51.00% 51.00% 26.01% 100.00% 26.01% 26.01% 51.00%  Paris  KPMG  100.00%  51.00%  100.00%  51.00%  Paris  KPMG  100.00%  75.99%  100.00%  75.99%  Paris  KPMG  100.00%  75.99%  100.00%  75.99%  Paris Paris  KPMG KPMG  100.00% 100.00%  75.99% 75.99%  100.00% 100.00%  75.99% 75.99%  Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw Warsaw  KPMG VGD Audyt KPMG KPMG n.a. KPMG KPMG KPMG n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG KPMG n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a.  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 0.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00%  0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 60.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 65.07% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 60.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 65.07% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  Bucharest Bucharest Bucharest Bucharest Bucharest Bucharest Bucharest Bucharest Bucharest Bucharest Bucharest Bucharest Bucharest Bucharest  n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG  0.00% 100.00% 0.00% 85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00%  0.00% 100.00% 0.00% 85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00%  85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00%  85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00% 100.00% 100.00% 85.00%  Poland: EDP Renewables Polska HoldCo, S.A. EDP Renewables Polska OPCO, S.A. EDP Renewables Polska, Sp. z o.o. Elektrownia Wiatrowa Kresy I, Sp. z o.o. Farma Wiatrowa Starozreby, Sp. z o.o. J&Z Wind Farms, Sp. z o.o. Korsze Wind Farm, Sp. z o.o. Masovia Wind Farm I, Sp. z o.o. Miramit Investments, Sp. z o.o. Molen Wind II, Sp. z o.o. Morska Farma Wiatrowa Gryf, Sp. z o.o. Morska Farma Wiatrowa Neptun, Sp. z o.o. Morska Farma Wiatrowa Pomorze, Sp. z o.o. Radziejów Wind Farm, Sp. z o.o. Relax Wind Park I, Sp. zo.o. Relax Wind Park II, Sp. z o.o. Relax Wind Park III, Sp. z o.o. Relax Wind Park IV, Sp. z o.o. Karpacka Mala Energetyka, Sp. z o.o. Romania: EDP Renewables România, S.r.l. (*) EDPR RO PV, S.r.l. EDPR RO Trading, S.r.l. Cernavoda Power, S.r.l. Cujmir Solar, S.r.l. Foton Delta, S.r.l. Foton Epsilon, S.r.l. Pestera Wind Farm, S.A. Potelu Solar, S.r.l. S. C. Ialomita Power, S.r.l. Sibioara Wind Farm, S.r.l. Studina Solar, S.r.l. Vanju Mare Solar, S.r.l. VS Wind Farm, S.A.  (*) Merged into S. C. Ialomita Power, S.r.l. United Kingdom: EDPR UK Limited MacColl Offshore Windfarm Limited Moray Offshore Renewables Power Limited Moray Offshore Windfarm (East) Ltd Moray Offshore Windfarm (West) Limited Stevenson Offshore Windfarm Limited Telford Offshore Windfarm Limited  Cardiff Cardiff Cardiff Cardif Cardif Cardiff Cardiff  KPMG n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a.  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 66.64% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 66.64% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00%  Milano Milano Milano Milano  KPMG KPMG n.a. n.a.  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  Italy: EDP Renewables Italia, S.r.l. EDP Renewables Italia Holding, S.r.l. Castellaneta Wind, S.r.l. Laterza Wind, S.r.l.  76  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  287   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  2016  2015  Head Company  Office  Pietragalla Eolico, S.r.l. Re Plus, S.r.l. TACA Wind, S.r.l. Villa Castelli Wind, S.r.l. WinCap, S.r.l. AW 2, S.r.l. Conza Energia, S.r.l. Lucus Power, S.r.l. Parco Eolico Banzi, S.r.l. San Mauro, S.r.l. Sarve, S.r.l.  Milano Milano Milano Milano Milano Milan Milan Melfi Milan Milan Milan  T Power, S.p.A.  Cesena  Tivano, S.r.l. VRG Wind 127, S.r.l. VRG Wind 149, S.r.l.  Milan Rovereto Rovereto  Auditor KPMG n.a. KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG n.a. Baker Tilly Revisa KPMG n.a. n.a.  % of capital  % of voting rights  % of capital  % of voting rights  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00%  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00%  100.00% 80.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%  100.00% 80.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%  100.00%  100.00%  0.00%  0.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  0.00% 0.00% 0.00%  0.00% 0.00% 0.00%  Belgium: EDP Renewables Belgium, S.A.  Brussels Louvain-laNeuve  Greenwind, S.A.  KPMG  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  KPMG  100.00%  51.00%  100.00%  100.00%  KPMG  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  n.a.  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  n.a.  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  Texas Ohio Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas New York Oregon Oklahoma New York Oregon Maine New York Oregon  KPMG n.a. KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a.  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 75.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 75.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 75.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  Oregon  n.a.  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  Arizona Texas Texas Texas Illinois Illinois Illinois Illinois  n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  The Netherlands: EDPR International Investments B.V.  Amsterdam  North america geography / platform: México: EDPR Servicios de México, S. de R.L. de C.V. Vientos de Coahuila, S.A. de C.V.  Ciudad de México Ciudad de México  USA: EDP Renewables North America, LLC 17th Star Wind Farm, LLC 2007 Vento I, LLC 2007 Vento II, LLC 2008 Vento III, LLC 2009 Vento IV, LLC 2009 Vento V, LLC 2009 Vento VI, LLC 2010 Vento VII, LLC 2010 Vento VIII, LLC 2011 Vento IX, LLC 2011 Vento X, LLC 2014 Sol I, LLC 2014 Vento XI, LLC 2014 Vento XII, LLC 2015 Vento XIII, LLC 2015 Vento XIV, LLC 2016 Vento XV LLC 2016 Vento XVI LLC Alabama Ledge Wind Farm, LLC Antelope Ridge Wind Power Project, LLC Arbuckle Mountain Wind Farm, LLC Arkwright Summit Wind Farm, LLC Arlington Wind Power Project, LLC Aroostook Wind Energy, LLC Ashford Wind Farm, LLC Athena-Weston Wind Power Project II, LLC Athena-Weston Wind Power Project, LLC AZ Solar, LLC BC2 Maple Ridge Holdings, LLC BC2 Maple Ridge Wind, LLC Big River Wind Power Project LLC Black Prairie Wind Farm II, LLC Black Prairie Wind Farm III, LLC Black Prairie Wind Farm, LLC Blackstone Wind Farm II, LLC  77  288  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015   ANNUAL REPORT CONSOLIDATED ANNUAL EDPR 2016 ACCOUNTS 2016  2016  2015  Head Company  Auditor  % of capital  % of voting rights  Illinois Illinois Illinois Illinois Oklahoma Illinois Illinois Oklahoma Oklahoma Illinois Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Illinois Illinois Illinois Wyoming New York New York Kansas Kansas Oregon Illinois  n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. KPMG KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a.  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 75.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  Colorado  n.a.  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  Texas Texas  n.a. n.a.  100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00%  Washington  n.a.  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  Nebraska Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas California Illinois New York Oklahoma Texas  n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.  100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  Indiana  n.a.  75.00%  75.00%  75.00%  75.00%  Indiana Texas Texas Texas Minnesota Illinois Texas Kansas Washington Oregon Washington  n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. KPMG KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  51.00% 0.00% 100.00% 0.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  Office  Blackstone Wind Farm III, LLC Blackstone Wind Farm IV, LLC Blackstone Wind Farm V, LLC Blackstone Wind Farm, LLC Blue Canyon Windpower II, LLC Blue Canyon Windpower III, LLC Blue Canyon Windpower IV, LLC Blue Canyon Windpower V, LLC Blue Canyon Windpower VI, LLC Blue Canyon Windpower VII, LLC Blue Canyon Wind Power LLC Blue Marmot I LLC Blue Marmot II LLC Blue Marmot III LLC Blue Marmot IV LLC Blue Marmot IX LLC Blue Marmot V LLC Blue Marmot VI LLC Blue Marmot VII LLC Blue Marmot VIII LLC Blue Marmot X LLC Blue Marmot XI LLC Broadlands Wind Farm II, LLC Broadlands Wind Farm III, LLC Broadlands Wind Farm, LLC Buffalo Bluff Wind Farm, LLC Chateaugay River Wind Farm, LLC Clinton County Wind Farm, LLC Cloud County Wind Farm, LLC Cloud West Wind Project, LLC Coos Curry Wind Power Project, LLC Cropsey Ridge Wind Farm, LLC Crossing Trails Wind Power Project, LLC Dairy Hills Wind Farm, LLC Diamond Power Partners, LLC East Klickitat Wind Power Project, LLC Eastern Nebraska Wind Farm, LLC EDPR Solar Ventures I, LLC EDPR South Table LLC EDPR Vento I Holding, LLC EDPR Vento IV Holding LLC EDPR WF, LLC EDPR Wind Ventures X, LLC EDPR Wind Ventures XI, LLC EDPR Wind Ventures XII, LLC EDPR Wind Ventures XIII, LLC EDPR Wind Ventures XIV, LLC EDPR Wind Ventures XV LLC EDPR Wind Ventures XVI LLC Five-Spot, LLC Ford Wind Farm, LLC Franklin Wind Farm, LLC Green Country Wind Farm, LLC Green Power Offsets, LLC Gulf Coast Windpower Management Company, LLC Headwaters Wind Farm, LLC Headwaters Wind Farm II LLC Hidalgo Wind Farm, LLC Hidalgo Wind Farm II LLC High Prairie Wind Farm II, LLC High Trail Wind Farm, LLC Horizon Wind Chocolate Bayou I, LLC Horizon Wind Energy Midwest IX, LLC Horizon Wind Energy Northwest I, LLC Horizon Wind Energy Northwest IV, LLC Horizon Wind Energy Northwest VII, LLC  % of capital  % of voting rights  78 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  289   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  2016 Head Company  Office  Horizon Wind Energy Northwest X, LLC Horizon Wind Energy Northwest XI, LLC Horizon Wind Energy Panhandle I, LLC Horizon Wind Energy Southwest I, LLC Horizon Wind Energy Southwest II, LLC Horizon Wind Energy Southwest III, LLC Horizon Wind Energy Southwest IV, LLC Horizon Wind Energy Valley I, LLC Horizon Wind Freeport Windpower I LLC Horizon Wind MREC Iowa Partners, LLC Horizon Wind Ventures I, LLC Horizon Wind Ventures IB, LLC Horizon Wind Ventures IC, LLC Horizon Wind Ventures II, LLC Horizon Wind Ventures III, LLC Horizon Wind Ventures IX, LLC Horizon Wind Ventures VI, LLC Horizon Wind Ventures VII, LLC Horizon Wind Ventures VIII, LLC Horizon Wyoming Transmission, LLC Horse Mountain Wind Farm LLC Jericho Rise Wind Farm, LLC Juniper Wind Power Partners, LLC Lexington Chenoa Wind Farm II, LLC Lexington Chenoa Wind Farm III, LLC Lexington Chenoa Wind Farm, LLC Lone Valley Solar Park I, LLC Lone Valley Solar Park II, LLC Lost Lakes Wind Farm, LLC Machias Wind Farm, LLC Madison Windpower, LLC Marble River, LLC Martinsdale Wind Farm, LLC Meadow Lake Wind Farm II, LLC Meadow Lake Wind Farm III, LLC Meadow Lake Wind Farm IV, LLC Meadow Lake Wind Farm V, LLC Meadow Lake Wind Farm VI LLC Meadow Lake Wind Farm VII LLC Meadow Lake Wind Farm, LLC Mesquite Wind, LLC Moran Wind Farm LLC New Trail Wind Farm, LLC North Slope Wind Farm, LLC Number Nine Wind Farm, LLC Old Trail Wind Farm, LLC OPQ Property, LLC Pacific Southwest Wind Farm, LLC Paulding Wind Farm II, LLC Paulding Wind Farm III, LLC Paulding Wind Farm IV, LLC Paulding Wind Farm, LLC Paulding Wind Farm V LLC Peterson Power Partners, LLC Pioneer Prairie Interconnection, LLC Pioneer Prairie Wind Farm I, LLC Pioneer Prairie Wind Farm II, LLC Post Oak Wind, LLC Quilt Block Wind Farm, LLC Rail Splitter Wind Farm, LLC Redbed Plains Wind Farm LLC Reloj del Sol Wind Farm LLC Rio Blanco Wind Farm, LLC Rising Tree Wind Farm II, LLC Rising Tree Wind Farm III, LLC Rising Tree Wind Farm, LLC Riverstart Solar Park II LLC Riverstart Solar Park LLC Rolling Upland Wind Farm LLC  Oregon Oregon Texas New Mexico Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Texas Wyoming Texas New York Oregon Illinois Illinois Illinois California California Iowa New York New York New York Colorado Indiana Indiana Indiana Indiana Texas Texas Indiana Texas Texas Illinois New York Maine Illinois Illinois Arizona Ohio Ohio Ohio Ohio Texas California Iowa Iowa Iowa Texas Wisconsin Illinois Texas Texas Texas California California California Texas Texas Texas  2015  Auditor  % of capital  % of voting rights  n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. KPMG KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. KPMG n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG KPMG KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a.  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 75.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 75.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 0.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  % of capital  % of voting rights  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 75.00% 100.00% 51.00% 75.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 75.00% 100.00% 51.00% 75.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 75.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 51.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%  79  290  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015   ANNUAL REPORT CONSOLIDATED ANNUAL EDPR 2016 ACCOUNTS 2016  2016  2015  Head Company  Auditor  % of capital  % of voting rights  Kansas Washington Washington New York Colorado Wyoming Wyoming Wyoming Wyoming Wyoming Texas Colorado New York Texas Oregon Oregon New York Colorado Iowa Texas Texas Texas Kansas Oregon Oregon Washington Wisconsin Illinois Nevada California California  n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 51.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 0.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 0.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  Ontario Ontario Alberta Alberta Bristish Columbia Ontario Ontario Bristish Columbia Ontario Ontario  n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00%  n.a.  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  n.a. n.a.  100.00% 51.00%  100.00% 51.00%  100.00% 51.00%  100.00% 51.00%  n.a.  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  n.a. KPMG  100.00% 51.00%  100.00% 51.00%  100.00% 51.00%  100.00% 51.00%  São Paulo Natal Natal Maracanaú Maracanaú Maracanaú Maracanaú Maracanaú Natal Natal Natal Natal Natal Santa Catarina Agua Doce  KPMG n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG KPMG  100.00% 50.99% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00%  100.00% 50.99% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 100.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00%  100.00% 50.99% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00%  100.00% 50.99% 100.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00% 51.00%  Office  Rush County Wind Farm, LLC Saddleback Wind Power Project, LLC Sagebrush Power Partners, LLC Sardinia Windpower, LLC Signal Hill Wind Power Project, LLC Simpson Ridge Wind Farm II, LLC Simpson Ridge Wind Farm III, LLC Simpson Ridge Wind Farm IV, LLC Simpson Ridge Wind Farm V, LLC Simpson Ridge Wind Farm, LLC Spruce Ridge Wind Farm LLC Stinson Mills Wind Farm, LLC Stone Wind Power, LLC Sustaining Power Solutions, LLC Telocaset Wind Power Partners, LLC The Nook Wind Power Project, LLC Tug Hill Windpower, LLC Tumbleweed Wind Power Project, LLC Turtle Creek Wind Farm, LLC Waverly Wind Farm II LLC Waverly Wind Farm LLC Verde Wind Power, LLC Western Trail Wind Project I, LLC Wheatfield Holding, LLC Wheatfield Wind Power Project, LLC Whiskey Ridge Power Partners, LLC Whistling Wind WI Energy Center, LLC Whitestone Wind Purchasing, LLC Wilson Creek Power Partners, LLC Wind Turbine Prometheus, L.P. WTP Management Company, LLC  % of capital  % of voting rights  Canada: EDP EDP EDP EDP  Renewables Renewables Renewables Renewables  Canada Ltd. Canada LP Holdings Ltd. Sharp Hills Project GP Ltd. Sharp Hills Project LP  Nation Rise Wind Farm GP Inc. Nation Rise Wind Farm LP SBWFI GP Inc South Branch Wind Farm II GP Inc. South Branch Wind Farm II GP LP South Dundas Wind Farm LP South america geography / platform: Brazil: EDP Renováveis Brasil, S.A. Central Eólica Aventura I, S.A. Central Eólica Aventura II, S.A. Central Eólica Babilônia I, S.A. Central Eólica Babilônia II, S.A. Central Eólica Babilônia III, S.A. Central Eólica Babilônia IV, S.A. Central Eólica Babilônia V, S.A. Central Eólica Baixa do Feijão I, S.A. Central Eólica Baixa do Feijão II, S.A. Central Eólica Baixa do Feijão III, S.A. Central Eólica Baixa do Feijão IV, S.A. Central Eólica JAU, S.A. Central Nacional de Energia Eólica, S.A. Elebrás Projetos, S.A.  80 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  291   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  South africa geography / platform: South Africa: EDP Renewables South Africa, Proprietary Limited  Cape Town  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  Cape Town  Mazars Inc. n.a.  Dejann Trading and Investments, Proprietary Limited Jouren Trading and Investments, Proprietary Limited  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  Cape Town  n.a.  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  100.00%  The main financial indicators of the jointly controlled companies included in the consolidation under the proportionate consolidation method as at 31 December 2016, are as follows: Company Ceprastur, A.I.E. Compañía Eólica Aragonesa, S.A. Desarrollos Energéticos Canarios S.A. Eólica de Coahuila, S.A. de C.V. Evolución 2000, S.L. Flat Rock Windpower, LLC Flat Rock Windpower II, LLC Tebar Eólica, S.A.  Share capital  Head office  Auditor  % of capital  % of voting rights  360,607 6,701,165 37,564 $7,189,723 117,994 $530,426,287 $208,647,187 4,720,400  Oviedo Zaragoza Las Palmas Ciudad de Mexico Albacete New York New York Cuenca  n.a. KPMG n.a. n.a. KPMG E&Y E&Y Abante  56.76% 50.00% 49.90% 51.00% 49.15% 50.00% 50.00% 50.00%  56.76% 50.00% 49.90% 51.00% 49.15% 50.00% 50.00% 50.00%  The main financial indicators of the jointly controlled companies included in the consolidation under the proportionate consolidation method as at 31 December 2015, are as follows: Company Ceprastur, A.I.E. Compañía Eólica Aragonesa, S.A. Desarrollos Energéticos Canarios S.A. Eólica de Coahuila, S. de R.L. de C.V. Evolución 2000, S.L. Flat Rock Windpower, LLC Flat Rock Windpower II, LLC Tebar Eólica, S.A.  Share capital  Head office  Auditor  % of capital  % of voting rights  360,607 6,701,165 37,564 $114,443 117,994 $528,626,287 $207,447,187 4,720,400  Oviedo Zaragoza Las Palmas Ciudad de Mexico Albacete New York New York Cuenca  n.a. Deloitte n.a. n.a. KPMG E&Y E&Y Abante  56.76% 50.00% 49.90% 99.97% 49.15% 50.00% 50.00% 50.00%  56.76% 50.00% 49.90% 99.97% 49.15% 50.00% 50.00% 50.00%  The Associated Companies included in the consolidation under the equity method as at 31 December 2016, are as follows: Company Aprofitament D'Energies Renovables de L'Ebre, S.A. Biomasas del Pirineo, S.A. Blue Canyon Wind Power I, LLC Desarollos Eolicos de Canárias, S.A. Les Eoliennes en Mer de Dieppe Le Tréport, SAS Eoliennes en Mer Iles d'Yeu et de Noirmoutier, S.A.S. Parque Eólico Belmonte, S.A. Parque Eólico Sierra del Madero, S.A. Solar Siglo XXI, S.A. WindPlus, S.A.  Share capital  Head office  Auditor  % of capital  % of voting rights  3,869,020  Barcelona  Jordi Guilera Valls  13.29%  13.29%  454,896 $40,364,480 2.391.900  Huesca Oklahoma Gran Canaria  n.a. PwC KPMG  30.00% 25.00% 44.75%  30.00% 25.00% 44.75%  14,471,028  Dieppe  E&Y  43.00%  43.00%  17,187,000  Nantes  E&Y  43.00%  43.00%  120,400 7,194,021 80,000 1,250,000  Madrid Madrid Ciudad Real Lisbon  E&Y E&Y n.a. PwC  29.90% 42.00% 25.00% 19.40%  29.90% 42.00% 25.00% 19.40%  The Associated Companies included in the consolidation under the equity method as at 31 December 2015, are as follows: Company Aprofitament D'Energies Renovables de L'Ebre, S.A. Biomasas del Pirineo, S.A. Blue Canyon Wind Power I, LLC Cultivos Energéticos de Castilla, S.A. Desarollos Eolicos de Canárias, S.A. Les Eoliennes en Mer de Dieppe - Le Tréport, SAS Eoliennes en Mer Iles d'Yeu et de Noirmoutier, S.A.S. Modderfontein Wind Energy Project, Ltd. Parque Eólico Belmonte, S.A. Parque Eólico Sierra del Madero, S.A. Inch Cape Offshore Limited (*) Solar Siglo XXI, S.A. WindPlus, S.A.  Share capital  Head office  Auditor  % of capital  % of voting rights  3,869,020  Barcelona  Jordi Guilera Valls  38.96%  23.62%  454,896 $42,316,480 300,000 2.391.900 14,471,028  Huesca Oklahoma Burgos Gran Canaria Dieppe  n.a. n.a. n.a. KPMG E&Y  30.00% 25.00% 30.00% 44.75% 43.00%  30.00% 25.00% 30.00% 44.75% 43.00%  17,187,000  Nantes  E&Y  43.00%  43.00%  ZAR 1,000 120,400 7,194,021 £1 80,000 1,250,000  Cape Town Madrid Madrid Edinburgh Ciudad Real Lisbon  n.a. E&Y E&Y Deloitte n.a. PwC  42.50% 29.90% 42.00% 49.00% 25.00% 19.40%  42.50% 29.90% 42.00% 49.00% 25.00% 19.40%  (*) Balances related to the company Inch Cape Offshore Limited were reclassified to assets held for sale as of December 31, 2015  81  292  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015   ANNUAL REPORT  ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  The summarised financial information for subsidiaries with material non-controlling interests as at 31 December 2016, are as follows: Horizon Wind Ventures IB, LLC  Horizon Wind Ventures IC, LLC  EDPR Wind Ventures XI, LLC  EDP Renovaveis France S.A.S.  EDP Renovaveis Portugal S.A.  Non-Current Assets Current Assets Non-Current Liabilities Current Liabilities  422,112 320,108 -  322,158 198,072 -  161,333 171,254 -  134,214 9,702 42,852 47,962  467,945 32,064 86,504 302,498  Revenues Net profit for the year  15,630  12,854  3,063  26,543 992  142,160 28,953  -  -  -  -  24,790  EDPR Wind Ventures XIV, LLC  EDPR Wind Ventures XIII, LLC  EDPR Participaciones, S.L.U.  EDP Renewables Polska HoldCo, S.A.  EDP Renewables Italia, S.r.l.  Non-Current Assets Current Assets Non-Current Liabilities Current Liabilities  216,281 220,808 -  208,727 214,573 1  176,441 2,293 89,561 575  129,767 79 15,562 16,865  145,123 8,778 79,743 46,133  Revenues Net profit for the year  1,258  1,241  -107  -1,393  15,933 789  -  -  8,506  -  -  Thousand Euros  Dividends paid to Non-controlling interests  Thousand Euros  Dividends paid to Non-controlling interests  The summarised financial information for subsidiaries with material non-controlling interests as at 31 December 2015, are as follows: Horizon Wind Ventures IB, LLC  Horizon Wind Ventures IC, LLC  EDPR Wind Ventures XI, LLC  EDP Renovaveis France S.A.S.  EDP Renovaveis Portugal S.A.  Non-Current Assets Current Assets Non-Current Liabilities Current Liabilities  446,759 4,126 3,233 3,100  374,436 285,442 -  167,955 172,998 47  136,441 12,931 47,517 54,025  459,174 39,047 86,682 309,717  Revenues Net profit for the year  27,044  31,052  2,258  29,892 4,213  136,603 47,442  -  -  -  -  33,246  EDPR Wind Ventures XII, LLC  Post Oak Wind, LLC  VS Wind Farm, S.A.  Cernavoda Power, S.r.l.  Horizon Wind Ventures IX, LLC  Non-Current Assets Current Assets Non-Current Liabilities Current Liabilities  96,520 101,487 -  64,102 4,126 3,233 3,100  79,528 8,735 1,401 90,671  88,291 14,808 82,946 47,955  87,123 94,951 35  Revenues Net profit for the year  -2,146  23,466 4,958  5,630 -6,285  19,119 -4,423  -832  -  -  -  -  -  Thousand Euros  Dividends paid to Non-controlling interests  Thousand Euros  Dividends paid to Non-controlling interests  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  85  293   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  Annex 2 Group Activity by Operating Segment Operating Segment Information for the years ended 31 December 2016 Thousand Euros Europe  North America  Brazil  Segments total  913,005 913,005  507,639 197,544 705,183  34,378 34,378  1,455,022 197,544 1,652,566  Gross operating profit  34,620 -161,985 -30,335 -88,834 -246,534 666,471  23,226 -139,492 -43,875 -43,510 -203,651 501,532  1,534 -7,325 -2,080 -1,438 -9,309 25,069  59,380 -308,802 -76,290 -133,782 -459,494 1,193,072  Provisions Amortisation and impairment Operating profit  -4,795 -301,888 359,788  90 -289,130 212,492  -7,988 17,081  -4,705 -599,006 589,361  1,748  533  -  2,281  Revenues Income from institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms Other operating income Supplies and services Personnel costs and Employee benefits expenses Other operating expenses  Share of profit of associates Assets  6,823,683  8,127,174  288,955  15,239,812  Liabilities  341,094  1,139,762  7,272  1,488,128  Operating Investment  131,590  840,930  56,764  1,029,284  Note: The Segment "Europe" includes: i) revenues in the amount of 377,244 thousands of Euros from Spanish companies; ii) assets from Spanish companies in the amount of 2,990,438 thousands of Euros.  294 298  Notes toto the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the yearsended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  86   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Reconciliation between the Segment Information and the Financial Statements Thousand Euros  Revenues of the Reported Segments Revenues of Other Segments Elimination of intra-segment transactions Revenues of the EDPR Group  1,455,022 18,289 -20,097 1,453,214  Gross operating profit of the Reported Segments Gross operating profit of Other Segments Elimination of intra-segment transactions Gross operating profit of the EDPR Group  1,193,072 -15,893 -6,228 1,170,951  Operating profit of the Reported Segments Operating profit of Other Segments Elimination of intra-segment transactions Operating profit of the EDPR Group  589,361 -16,566 -8,836 563,959  Assets of the Reported Segments Not Allocated Assets Financial Assets Tax assets Debtors and other assets Assets of Other Segments Elimination of intra-segment transactions Assets of the EDPR Group  15,239,812 1,415,622 997,571 153,475 264,576 25,312 53,723 16,734,469  Investments in joint ventures and associates  340,120  Liabilities of the Reported Segments Not Allocated Liabilities Financial Liabilities Institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms Tax liabilities Payables and other liabilities Liabilities of Other Segments Elimination of intra-segment transactions Liabilities of the EDPR Group  1,488,128 7,092,908 3,406,069 2,339,425 453,532 893,882 15,023 565,396 9,161,455  Operating Investment of the Reported Segments Operating Investment of Other Segments Operating Investment of the EDPR Group  1,029,284 77 1,029,361  Thousand Euros  Provisions Amortisation and impairment Share of profit of associates  Other segments  59,380 -308,802 -76,290 -133,782  1,495 -16,441 -17,604 -1,631  -4,705 -599,006 2,281  Other operating income Supplies and services Personnel costs and Employee benefits expenses Other operating expenses  Total of the reported segments  Elimination of intra-segment transactions  Total of the EDPR group  -7,123 20,503 488  53,752 -304,740 -93,894 -134,925  -673  -2,608  -4,705 -602,287  -  -2,466  -185  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for years ended 31 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the the years ended December 2016 and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  87 295  299   ENERGY ENERGY AS THE NEWART AS THE NEWART  Operating Segment Information for the years ended 31 December 2015 Thousand Euros  Europe  Brazil  Segments total  498,218 197,442 695,660  21,379 21,379  Gross operating profit  140,191 -150,845 -26,725 -104,057 -141,436 690,158  19,620 -134,261 -40,159 -78,963 -233,763 461,897  622 -5,549 -1,568 -2,585 -9,080 12,299  160,433 -290,655 -68,452 -185,605 -384,279 1,164,354  Provisions Amortisation and impairment Operating profit  -21 -289,290 400,847  193 -267,085 195,005  -5,072 7,227  172 -561,447 603,079  11,952  -7,674  -  4,278  6,842,282  7,307,627  179,283  14,329,192  Liabilities  323,305  987,493  5,609  1,316,407  Operating Investment  183,736  645,991  72,902  902,629  Revenues Income from institutional partnerships in U.S. wind farms  Other operating income Supplies and services Personnel costs and Employee benefits expenses Other operating expenses  Share of profit of associates Assets  831,594 831,594  North America  1,351,191 197,442 1,548,633  Note: The Segment "Europe" includes: i) revenues in the amount of 378,781 thousand Euros from Spanish companies; ii) assets from Spanish companies in the amount of 3,005,689 thousand Euros.  296 300  Notes the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016and 2015  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  88   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Reconciliation between the Segment Information and the Financial Statements Reconciliation between the Segment Information and the Financial Statements Thousand Euros Thousand Euros  Revenues of the Reported Segments Revenues of the Reported Segments Revenues of Other Segments Revenues of Other Segments Elimination of intra-segment transactions Elimination of intra-segment transactions Revenues of the EDPR Group Revenues of the EDPR Group  1,351,191 1,351,191 16,747 16,747 -18,333 -18,333 1,349,605 1,349,605  Gross operating profit of the Reported Segments Gross operating profit of the Reported Segments Gross operating profit of Other Segments Gross operating profit of Other Segments Elimination of intra-segment transactions Elimination of intra-segment transactions Gross operating profit of the EDPR Group Gross operating profit of the EDPR Group  1,164,354 1,164,354 -22,059 -22,059 1,142,295 1,142,295  Operating profit of the Reported Segments Operating profit of the Reported Segments Operating profit of Other Segments Operating profit of Other Segments Elimination of intra-segment transactions Elimination of intra-segment transactions Operating profit of the EDPR Group Operating profit of the EDPR Group  603,079 603,079 -25,241 -25,241 577,838 577,838  Assets of the Reported Segments Assets of the Reported Segments Not Not Allocated Assets Allocated Assets Financial Assets Financial Assets Tax Tax assets assets Debtors other assets Debtors and and other assets Assets of Other Segments Assets of Other Segments Elimination of intra-segment transactions Elimination of intra-segment transactions Assets of the EDPR Group Assets of the EDPR Group  14,329,192 14,329,192 1,235,566 1,235,566 850,142 850,142 165,746 165,746 219,677 219,677 24,468 24,468 146,932 146,932 15,736,157 15,736,157  Investments in ventures and associates Investments in jointjoint ventures and associates  333,800 333,800  Liabilities of the Reported Segments Liabilities of the Reported Segments Not Not Allocated Liabilities Allocated Liabilities Financial Liabilities Financial Liabilities Institutional partnerships in wind farms Institutional partnerships in U.S.U,S, wind farms Tax Tax liabilities liabilities Payables other liabilities Payables and and other liabilities Liabilities of Other Segments Liabilities of Other Segments Elimination of intra-segment transactions Elimination of intra-segment transactions Liabilities of the EDPR Group Liabilities of the EDPR Group  1,316,407 1,316,407 7,541,883 7,541,883 4,220,270 4,220,270 1,956,217 1,956,217 380,782 380,782 984,614 984,614 17,273 17,273 -7,377,957 -7,377,957 1,497,606 1,497,606  Operating Investment of the Reported Segments Operating Investment of the Reported Segments Operating Investment of Other Segments Operating Investment of Other Segments Operating Investment of the EDPR Group Operating Investment of the EDPR Group  Thousand Euros Thousand Euros Other operating income Other operating income Supplies services Supplies and and services Personnel costs Employee benefits expenses Personnel costs and and Employee benefits expenses Other operating expenses Other operating expenses Provisions Provisions Amortisation impairment Amortisation and and impairment Share of profit of associates Share of profit of associates  902,629 902,629 25 25 902,654 902,654  Total of Total of the the reported reported segments segments  Other Elimination of intraElimination of intra- Total of the the EDPR Total of EDPR Other segments segment transactions segment transactions group segments group  160,433 160,433 -290,655 -290,655 -68,452 -68,452 -185,605 -185,605  1,128 1,128 -20,145 -20,145 -15,817 -15,817 -3,972 -3,972  -1 -1 18,072 18,072 1 1 261 261  161,560 161,560 -292,728 -292,728 -84,268 -84,268 -189,316 -189,316  172 172 -561,447 -561,447  -949 -949  -2,233 -2,233  172 172 -564,629 -564,629  -  -5,795 -5,795  -1,517 -1,517  4,278 4,278  -  Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December and and Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the the years ended December 20162016 20152015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for years ended 31 31 December 2016 and 2015 Notes to the Consolidated Annual Accounts for the years ended 31 December 2016 and 2015  8989 297 301   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Statement of Compliance on SCIRF  302 298   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Auditor’s Report on SCIRF  303  299   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  304 300   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Statement of Compliance on Consolidated Financial Information  305  301   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  Auditor's Report on the Consolidated Annual Accounts  306 302   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  307  303    ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  Concepts and Definitions  A ASSET ROTATION Strategy aimed at crystallising the value of a project by selling a minority stake in an asset and  especially in animal respiration and in  DIVIDEND POLICY  the decay or combustion of animal  Set of guidelines a company uses to  and vegetable matter, is absorbed  decide how much of its earnings it  from the air by plants in  will pay out to shareholders.  photosynthesis, and is used in the carbonation of beverages.  reinvesting the proceeds in another  CASH-FLOW  asset, targeting greater growth.  Amount of cash generated and used  AVAILABILITY The percentage of time a wind turbine is technically available to  by a company in a given period. Cash  EBITDA  flow can be used as an indication of a  An accounting measure calculated  company’s financial strength.  using a company’s net earnings,  capture the wind resource and  COD  convert it to electricity.  Commercial Operating Date. Date at which the project starts officially operating, after the testing and  B BLADES The large “arms” of wind turbines that extend from the hub of a generator. Most turbines have either two or three blades. Wind blowing over the blades causes the blades to “lift” and rotate. BOP Balance of plant. All the supporting components and auxiliary equipment of the wind farm other than the generating unit.  commissioning period. COP 21 Conference of parties, UN Climate Change Conference held in Paris. CORE OPEX Includes costs of supplies and services and with personnel, costs that are controllable by the company. CURTAILMENT The forced shut-down of some or all  CAGR Compound annual growth rate CAPEX Capital Expenditure. Funds used by a company to acquire or upgrade physical assets such as property, industrial buildings or equipment (ex: construction of wind farms). CO2 Carbon dioxide. A heavy colourless gas that does not support  before interest expenses, taxes, depreciation and amortization are subtracted, as a proxy for a company’s current operating profitability. EPS Earnings per share. The portion of a company's profit allocated to each outstanding share of common stock. EQUITY CONSOLIDATION Accounting process of treating equity investments, in associate companies. Equity account is usually applied where the entity holds 20-50% of voting stock.  of the wind turbine generators within a wind farm to mitigate issues associated with turbine loading export to the grid, or certain planning conditions. Curtailment is controlled  C  E  by the regional transmission  F FEED IN TARIFFS  operator.  Remuneration framework that  D  applied to all of the electricity they  guarantees that a company will receive a set price from their utility,  DIVIDEND PAY-OUT RATIO Measures the percentage of a company’s net income that is given to shareholders in the form dividends. (Total Annual Dividends per Share / Earnings per Share).  generate and provide to the grid. FINANCIAL INVESTMENT An asset in which to put money into with the expectation of obtaining gains or an appreciation in to a larger sum of money. FOREX The market in which currencies are traded.  combustion, dissolves in water to form carbonic acid, is formed  41  305   ENERGY AS THE NEWART  FULL SCOPE Scheme of maintenance in which a  I  N  third party supplier is directly  INSTALLED CAPACITY  NET CAPACITY FACTOR (NCF)  responsible for the full maintenance  Capacity installed and ready to  The ratio of a plant’s actual output  of the project. The project pays a  produce energy.  over a period of time, to its potential  fixed fee and assumes low risk.  output if it were possible for it to  ITC Investment tax credit. Tax incentive  G GC Green certificate. Tradable  in the US which differ from the Production Tax Credit in the sense that the Tax Equity Investor receives  renewable energy sources. GHG  continuously over the same period of time. Also known as Load Factor. NET DEBT  a one shot tax credit that covers a  A metric that shows a company’s  percentage of the investment.  overall debt situation calculated using company’s total debt less cash on  commodity proving that certain electricity is generated using  operate at full nameplate capacity  hand.  L  Greenhouse gases. Gases that trap  NET INVESTMENT Equals (Capex + Financial investments – Financial  LCOE  the heat of the sun in the Earth's  Levelized cost of electricity. Provides  atmosphere, producing the  a common way to compare the cost  greenhouse effect; the two major  of energy across technologies. LCOE  divestments).  greenhouse gases are water vapour  takes into account the installed  and carbon dioxide; lesser  system price and associated costs  greenhouse gases include methane,  such as financing, land, insurance,  ozone, chlorofluorocarbons, and  transmission, operation and  nitrogen oxides.  maintenance, and depreciation. The  GROSS PROFIT An accounting measure calculated using a company’s revenue minus its cost of goods sold. Gross profit is a company’s residual profit for selling a product or service and deducting the cost associated with its production  LCOE is a true apples-to-apples comparison of electricity costs and is the most common measure used by electric utilities or purchasers of power to evaluate the financial  Unit of electric power equal to 1,000 MW. GWH Equal to 1,000 MW used continuously for one hour.  O&M Operations and maintenance. All the activities necessary to run the windfarm in a reliable, safe and economical way including for instance maintenance, repair, monitoring and operation.  viability and attractiveness of a wind energy project.  P  M  PPA  M3  generator (provider) and a power  Modular maintenance model.  purchaser (host).The power  Maintenance scheme which is halfway  purchaser buys energy, and  and sale. GW  O  Power purchase agreement. A legal contract between an electricity  HEDGING  sometimes also capacity and/or  scope maintenance, with some  H  between the self-perform and a full  ancillary services, from the electricity  activities being performed in-house.  generator.  MW Unit of electric power equal to 106 watts.  Risk management strategy used in  commercial tax credit in the US that  MWH  loss from fluctuations in the prices of  Equal to 10 watts of electricity used  commodities, currencies, or  continuously for one hour.  42 306  Production tax credit. The result of the Energy Policy Act of 1992, a  limiting or offsetting probability of  securities.  PTC  6  applies to wholesale electrical generators of wind energy facilities based upon the amount of energy generated in a year.   ANNUAL REPORT ANNUAL REPORT EDPR 2016 EDPR 2016  R  SF6 Sulfur hexafluoride. Colorless, odorless, non-flammable and potent  RENEWABLE ENERGY Energy that is derived from resources that are regenerative or that cannot be depleted including wind energy,  greenhouse gas which is used in the electrical industry especially in gas insulated switchgear power  solar, biomass, geothermal, and  installations.  moving water. Also known as  SOLAR PV  alternative energy.  Solar photovoltaic. Plant that generates electricity by means of  REC Renewable energy credit. Represents the property rights to the environmental, social, and other nonpower qualities of renewable  solar power through photovoltaics, consisting on an arrangement of several components, including solar panels to absorb and convert sunlight into electricity, a solar inverter,  electricity generation. A REC can be  cables and other electrical  sold separately from the electricity  accessories.  associated with a renewable energy generation source. RES  T  Renewable energy sources. RCF Retained  cash-flow.  available  to  shareholders  pay and/or  The  amount  dividends  to  to  fund new includes EBITDA  investments and after paying interests and tax equity investor’s  costs  and  after  TSR Total Shareholder Return. Measures the return that the stock provides to the shareholder, including dividends paid and the stock price appreciation.  paying  distributions to equity partners and taxes. ROIC CASH Return on Invested Capital (based on Cash Flows). Represents a measure of the profitability and value creation of a project or company.  W WATT (W) The rate of energy transfer equivalent to one ampere under an electrical pressure of one volt. One watt equals 1/746 horsepower, or  RPS  one joule per second. It is the  Renewable  Portfolio  Standard.  product of voltage and current  Regulation in the US that places an  (amperage). Watts are the yardstick  obligation  for measuring power.  in  certain  states  on  electricity supply companies to source a specific percentage of their energy from renewable sources.  WIND ENERGY Power generated by converting the mechanical energy of the wind into electrical energy through the use of a  S SELF-PERFORM Maintenance scheme in which all the maintenance works are done inhouse which means that the project assumes the whole risk.  wind generator. WIND FARM Used in reference to the land, wind turbine generators, electrical equipment, and transmission lines for the purpose of generating wind energy and alternative energy.  43  307   Publication EDP Renováveis, S.A. Plaza de la Gesta, 2 33007 Oviedo, Spain Printing Bicho das Cores Print run 60 Units Legal deposit 291932/09 March 2017 Additional information For further information about EDP Renováveis visit www.edprenovaveis.com where an electronic version of the 2016 Annual Report is also available. Printed on paper made with ECF – Elementary Chlorine ­ Free – cellulose with ISO 9001, Environmental Management ISO 14001 and forestry FSC certification. Paper from forests subjected to a sustained scientific reforestation process.      